=== TITLE ===
An integrated proteomic and peptidomic assessment of the normal human urinome.

=== ABSTRACT ===
BACKGROUND
Urine represents an ideal source of clinically relevant biomarkers as it contains a large number of proteins and low molecular weight peptides. The comprehensive characterization of the normal urinary proteome and peptidome can serve as a reference for future biomarker discovery. Proteomic and peptidomic analysis of urine can also provide insight into normal physiology and disease pathology, especially for urogenital diseases.

METHODS
We developed an integrated proteomic and peptidomic analytical protocol in normal urine. We employed ultrafiltration to separate protein and peptide fractions, which were analyzed separately using liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

RESULTS
By analyzing six urines from healthy individuals with advanced age, we identified 1754 proteins by proteomic analysis and 4543 endogenous peptides, arising from 566 proteins by peptidomic analysis. Overall, we identified 2091 non-redundant proteins by this integrated approach. In silico protease activity analysis indicated that metalloproteases are predominantly involved in the generation of the endogenous peptide signature. In addition, a number of proteins that were detected in normal urine have previously been implicated in various urological malignancies, including bladder cancer and renal cell carcinoma (RCC).

CONCLUSIONS
We utilized a highly sensitive proteomics approach that enabled us to identify one of the largest sets of protein identifications documented in normal human urine. The raw proteomics and peptidomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD003595.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Sample collection The study was approved by the Research Ethics Board of St. Michael’s Hospital. Approximately 20–50 mL of second morning, mid-stream urine was collected from three healthy female volunteers (65–79 years of age) and three healthy male volunteers (62–75 years of age) using a self-sampling method (Supplemental Table 1). All subjects included in the study had no history of kidney-related or systemic disease. All urine specimens were individually processed in parallel using the same reagents and columns to minimize bias in sample preparation. Following the addition of a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Com- plete™; Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim Germany) the samples were centrifuged at 2000 g for 10 min at 4 °C and immediately frozen at –80 °C until further processing. Proteomic and peptidomic sample preparation Urine samples were thawed on ice and vortexed to resuspend any precipitate. The samples were centrifuged at 2000 × g. Urine volumes were normalized with respect to 90 μmol of creatinine per sample (~3–10 mL per individual). The pH of the urine samples was adjusted to 8.0 by dropwise addition of 0.5 mol/L ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). The urine was ultrafiltered using Vivaspin 20 ultracentrifuga- tion filter devices (10 kDa MWCO; Sartorius Stedim Biotech), accord- ing to the manufacturer’s protocol. The retentate (proteomic sample) was recovered following ultracentrifugation and stored at –20 °C overnight for processing the next day. The filtrate (peptidomic sam- ple) was recovered following ultracentrifugation and dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to a final concentration of 2 mM. The filtrate was then incubated at room temperature for 30 min, followed by alkylation with 4 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature in the dark for 45 min. Filtrate samples were then acidified by dropwise addition of formic acid to pH 4.0. Acidi- fied samples were passed through a hydrophilic-lipophilic-balanced reversed-phase cartridge (Oasis HLB). The cartridge [1 mL (30 mg); Waters cat# WAT094225] was pre-equilibrated with 1 mL 90% ace- tonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid, and 0.02% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The cartridge was washed with 15 mL buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1% formic acid and 0.02% TFA). The acidified sample was then loaded and washed with 15 mL of buffer A. Peptides were eluted by adding 700 μL of 60% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, 0.02% TFA. Eluted samples were then mixed with equal volumes of ethyl acetate and centrifuged at 17,000 g for 5 min. The upper layer was discarded and the sample was reduced to a volume of 200 μL using the Speedvac system. Pep- tide samples were then stored at –20 °C until further processing. The next day retentate samples were thawed on ice and vor- texed. Retentate samples were assayed using the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) to determine the protein concentration. An equal mass of protein (200 μg) was collected from each sample and brought to a total volume of 100 μL using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Powdered urea was added to each tube to a final concentration of 8 M for protein denaturation. A final concentration of 20 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the retentate samples and incubated at room temperature for 30 min, which was then followed by alkyla- tion with 40 mM iodoacetemide (Sigma-Aldrich) at room tempera- ture in the dark for 45 min. Samples were diluted 4-fold with 50 mM ABC to reduce the urea concentration to 2 M. The samples were then digested with trypsin (50:1 protein/trypsin) overnight at 37 °C. Trypsin digestion was stopped the next day with formic acid to a final concentration of 1%. The samples were subsequently reduced to approximately 200 μL using the Speedvac system. Trypsin- digested protein samples were then stored at –20 °C until further processing. Strong cation exchange chromatography Both proteomic and peptidomic samples were re-suspended in 300 μL mobile phase A (0.26 M formic acid in 5% ACN). The samples were injected into a PolySUFLOETHYL A column with a 200-Å pore size and diameter of 5 μm (The Nest Group) containing a hydrophilic, anionic polymer (poly-2-sulfoethyl aspartamide). A 60 min linear gradient separation was performed on an HPLC system (Agilent 1100) using mobile phase B (0.26 M formic acid in 5% ACN and 1 M ammo- nium formate). The eluate was monitored at a wavelength of 280 nm. In total, 26 fractions per sample were collected for proteomics. Frac- tions 11–21 were pooled (Frs. 11–13, 14–17, and 18–21). In addition, 12 fractions per sample were collected for peptidomics. Fractions 3–9 were pooled (Frs. 3–5, 6, and 7–9). Fractions for both proteomic and peptidomic analysis were collected at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. LC-MS/MS analysis The proteomic and peptidomic fractions were desalted using an Omix C18 pipette tip (Agilent) and eluted in 5 μL buffer B (65% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in H2 O). After elution, 60 μL of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in H2 O) were added to each sample and 18 μL were loaded onto a 2 cm C18 trap column, packed with Varian Pursuit (5 μm C18) with an 8 μm tip (New Objective). This LC setup was coupled online to a Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer with a nanoelectrospray ionization source (Proxeon Biosystems). Each fraction underwent a 60 min gradient. The eluted peptides were analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry in positive ion mode. Individual urine specimens were run in duplicate on the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Data analysis Both the proteomic and peptidomic raw data were analyzed in Max- Quant 1.5.2.8 with the integrated Andromeda search engine [28]. Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data against a reverted version of the SwissProt human protein database (version January 2015) for proteomic analysis and a randomized version for peptidomic analysis. Label-free quantification was carried out as described by Luber et al. [29]. Protein abundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity. For proteomic analysis carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidized methionine and protein N-acetyla- tion were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was selected as the digestion method. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for proteomic analysis. For peptidomic analysis carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidized methionine and oxidized proline were set as variable modifications. An unspecific enzyme search was selected as the digestion method. A maximum of 50 missed cleavages were allowed for peptidomic analysis. For both proteomic and peptidomic analyses, first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm against a small ‘human-first-search’ database (part of MaxQuant) for the purpose of mass recalibration and main search was performed at 4.5 ppm against the SwissProt human protein data- base (version January 2015) [30]. Both the peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate was specified at 0.01. Bioinformatic analysis In silico protease prediction analysis was done using Proteasix (http://www.proteasix.org/), a publically available prediction tool that allows for the identification of proteases involved in generating the observed peptide signature [8, 31]. The observed naturally occur- ring urinary peptide sequences were aligned with the full-length SWISS-PROT sequence for cleavage site retrieval. Up to three amino acid substitutions in the eight amino acid-long cleavage site were allowed. The percentage frequency plot was generated by calculat- ing the number of observed cleavage sites per protease related to the total number of input cleavage sites. In addition, peptide sequence alignment was done using a previously described computational program, peptide extractor (PepEx) [32]. Proteolytic maps display the position of endogenous peptides in their respective precursor protein in addition to their abundance. The Human Protein Atlas (http://www.proteinatlas.org/) was mined to obtain a list of genes that display elevated transcript abun- dance in the kidney compared to other tissues. Three hundred and ninety-seven genes were found to have elevated expression in the kidney. Gene ontology (GO) data was retrieved by running gene names through The Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID 6.7) (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) search engine for biological process, molecular function, and cellular component annotations. Terms with a p value < 0.05 were considered statisti- cally significant. Pathway enrichment analysis was carried out using DAVID 6.7 search engine that matches gene names to significant pathways within the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) data- base. Terms with a p value < 0.05 were considered statistically sig- nificant. Statistical analysis Proteomic and peptidomic inter-individual variances were calculated from the median coefficient of variation (CV), which is the standard deviation divided by the mean measurement. Only proteins that had a label-free quantification intensity in at least 3 (50%) of the six urine samples for included for analysis

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

