=== TITLE ===
Quantitative Proteome Analysis Reveals Increased Content of Basement Membrane Proteins in Arteries From Patients With Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and Lower Levels Among Metformin Users.

=== ABSTRACT ===
BACKGROUND
The increased risk of cardiovascular diseases in type 2 diabetes mellitus has been extensively documented, but the origins of the association remain largely unknown. We sought to determine changes in protein expressions in arterial tissue from patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and moreover hypothesized that metformin intake influences the protein composition.

METHODS AND RESULTS
We analyzed nonatherosclerotic repair arteries gathered at coronary bypass operations from 30 patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and from 30 age- and sex-matched nondiabetic individuals. Quantitative proteome analysis was performed by isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation-labeling and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, tandem mass spectrometry analysis on individual arterial samples. The amounts of the basement membrane components, α1-type IV collagen and α2-type IV collagen, γ1-laminin and β2-laminin, were significantly increased in patients with diabetes mellitus. Moreover, the expressions of basement membrane components and other vascular proteins were significantly lower among metformin users when compared with nonusers. Patients treated with or without metformin had similar levels of hemoglobin A1c, cholesterol, and blood pressure. In addition, quantitative histomorphometry showed increased area fractions of collagen-stainable material in tunica intima and media among patients with diabetes mellitus.

CONCLUSIONS
The distinct accumulation of arterial basement membrane proteins in type 2 diabetes mellitus discloses a similarity between the diabetic macroangiopathy and microangiopathy and suggests a molecular explanation behind the alterations in vascular remodeling, biomechanical properties, and aneurysm formation described in diabetes mellitus. The lower amounts of basement membrane components in metformin-treated individuals are compatible with the hypothesis of direct beneficial drug effects on the matrix composition in the vasculature.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Patients and Arterial Material The repair artery from coronary bypass surgery (the internal mam- mary/the internal thoracic artery) was collected at the Department of Thoracic, Heart and Vascular Surgery, Odense University Hospital, consecutively from 2008 to 2012. Arterial tissue from 35 patients with T2DM was collected from our tissue collection, together with arteries from a group of 35 age- and sex-matched nondiabetic indi- viduals. Individuals were assigned as having T2DM diagnosis, if this diagnosis was registered in the patients file or if at least one hemo- globin A1c (HbA1c) measurement was >6.5%. Patients were found negative for GAD antibodies in a blood sample taken the day before the operation. Nondiabetics had HbA1c measurement <6.0%. All of the patients (both diabetic and nondiabetic) received statins. A blood sample was taken for lipid values, and the patient was questioned about current and previous smoking habits. Information about medi- cations, body weight, and height was extracted from the medical files. All participants gave written informed consent, and the study was approved by the local ethics committees (S-20100044). Immediately after surgery, the internal mammary artery was dis- sected free from the surrounding tissue, that is, muscle, fat, and the outer part of adventitia by a person unaware of the DM status of the patient. An arterial ring was cut and short-term formalin-fixed (≈24 hours in 4% buffered paraformaldehyde), then moved to a PBS solu- tion and subsequently embedded in paraffin. The paraffin blocks were cut into sections of 4 μm and elastin stained, and all samples had <5% of the circumference covered with intima lesions. Nevertheless, 5 pa- tient samples (and matching individuals) had to be removed because of minute amounts of tissue or incorrect embedding. The final group for proteome analysis therefore consists of 30 diabetic and 30 non- diabetic individuals (Table). A detailed description of the histology, quantitative histomorphometry, and immunohistochemistry is given in the Data Supplement. Proteome Analysis of Paraffin-Embedded Formalin- Fixed Artery Tissue Extraction and Digestion of Proteins in Spinfilters Our proteome analysis was based on material from 1 slice of the same formalin-fixed material as used for histology using a filter-aided di- gestion protocol modified from the study of Wiśniewski et al.27 The paraffin was dissolved by washing with chloroform, and the tissue was released from the object glass and transferred to an Eppendorf tube in 2-μL extraction buffer (40 mmol/L triethyl ammonium bicar- bonate pH 8, 4% SDS, 100 mmol/L dithiothreitol). The samples were incubated 20 minutes at 99°C followed by 120 minutes incubation at 80°C with 600 rpm agitation. The extracted proteins were added 2× 200 μL 8 mol/L urea in 40 mmol/L triethyl ammonium bicarbon- ate pH 8 and centrifuged through a 3000 molecular weight cut-off spin filter (Millipore Amicon Ultra) at 14 000g at room temperature. Proteins were alkylated in the spin filter using 50 mmol/L iodoacet- amide in 8 mol/L urea for 30 minutes in the dark. The buffers were exchanged by spinning 2× 100 μL 8 mol/L urea and 2× 100 μL 200 mmol/L triethyl ammonium bicarbonate through the filters before di- gesting overnight with 1 μg trypsin (Promega) at 37°C. 8-Plex iTRAQ Labeling Based on a nanodrop protein measurement, 3.5 μg peptides from each patient were labeled with isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantita- tion (iTRAQ) 8-plex reagent according to the manufacturer’s descrip- tion (Applied Biosystems, CA). In a series of investigations, the samples were labeled as follows—Label 113: pool non-DM, 114: pool DM, 115: non-DM 1, 116: DM 1, 117: non-DM 2, 118: DM 2, 119: non-DM 3, and 121: DM 3 (non-DM 1 and DM 1+non-DM 2 and DM 2+non-DM 3 and DM 3 are matched patient pairs). The labeled peptides were mixed in equal amounts into a total of ten 8-plex samples. Liquid chromatogra- phy–mass spectrometry, tandem mass spectrometry analyses were per- formed on these mixed samples with 6 individual samples (and 2 pools) per run. A detailed table describing the analytic design can be found in the Data Supplement (Table I in the Data Supplement). Reversed Phase Desalting of Peptides and Offline HILIC Fractionation The acidified samples were desalted using a reversed phase microcol- umn packed in a Gel Loader as described in the study by Gobom et al.28 The hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) frac- tionation was performed essentially as described in the study by Beck et al.29 In brief, the peptides were dissolved in HILIC buffer B (90% [v/v] acetonitrile, 0.1% [v/v] trifluoric acid) and fractionated into 22 fractions by a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano high-performance liquid chromatography using a 42-minute linear gradient and a TSKgel am- ide-80 HILIC column. Online Reversed Phase LC Separation and Mass Spectrometric Analyses The mass spectrometric analyses of the HILIC fractions were per- formed on a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific) instrument coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano high-performance liquid chromatog- raphy, essentially as described.30 The LC separation of the peptides was performed using a custom-made fused capillary precolumn (2 cm length, 360-μm outer diameter, 100-μm inner diameter) with a flow of 5 μL per minute for 7 minutes. Trapped peptides were separated on a custom-made fused capillary column (20 cm length, 360-μm outer di- ameter, 100-μm inner diameter) packed with ReproSil Pur C18 3-μm resin (Dr Maish, GmbH) with a flow of 300 nL per minute using a linear gradient from 95% solution A (0.1% formic acid) to 35% B (100% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) over 86 minutes followed by 10 minutes at 90% B and 14 minutes at 98% A at a flow rate of 300 nL per minute. Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode ap- plying automatic data–dependent switch between an Orbitrap survey MS scan in the mass range of 300 to 1500 m/z followed by higher- energy collisional dissociation fragmentation and Orbitrap detection of the 10 most intense ions observed in the MS scan. Data Processing and Quantification All Q-Exactive raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0.288 (Thermo Scientific). The Mascot search Engine v. 2.2.3 integrated with Proteome Discoverer was used to search the data with the following criteria—protein data- base: Swissprot; enzyme: Trypsin/P; maximum missed cleavage sites: 2; precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.1 Da; fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (K), and iTRAQ8plex (N-term); and variable modifications: oxidation (M). Only high confidence peptides (False discovery rate 1%) were includ- ed and only proteins identified with at least 2 peptides were included. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD002214 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride). Individual quantification of proteins in all samples was done rela- tive to the pool of arterial material from nondiabetics (iTRAQ 113) in each run. The 129 proteins, which could be identified and quantitated in at least 48 of 60, were used for quantification, as shown in the Table IIB in the Data Supplement. A reduction of variance was performed by standardizing each protein in each patient sample to the result of the pro- tein prelamin A/C (Table IIC in the Data Supplement). This protein was chosen for standardization because no difference was observed in the raw data between diabetic and nondiabetic samples and because the intrain- dividual variation of this protein was the lowest of all identified proteins. Furthermore, the accuracy of our method was assessed by cal- culating the coefficient of variation (CV%) from the ratio of iTRAQ label 113: pool non DM and iTRAQ label 114: pool DM. The average analytic between-run CV% in our data set was 10.4% (Table IID in the Data Supplement). Statistical Analysis Proteome results, as well as histomorphometric and clinical param- eters, are expressed as mean±SEM or as number or percentage, when appropriate. For comparison of categorical variables, χ2 or Fisher exact test analysis was used. Normality was investigated by the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test and homoscedasticity by F test. P values based on Student t test were calculated for all results, both when com- paring the diabetic and the nondiabetic groups and when comparing protein results from diabetic subjects treated with or without met- formin. In addition, the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure was used to correct for multiple testing in the proteome data set, when evaluating differences among all protein results between the diabetic and non- diabetic groups.

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

