=== TITLE ===
Digging More Missing Proteins Using an Enrichment Approach with ProteoMiner.

=== ABSTRACT ===
Human Proteome Project (HPP) aims at mapping entire human proteins with a systematic effort upon all the emerging techniques, which would enhance understanding of human biology and lay a foundation for development of medical applications. Until now, 2563 missing proteins (MPs, PE2-4) are still undetected even using the most sensitive approach of protein detection. Herein, we propose that enrichment of low-abundance proteins benefits MPs finding. ProteoMiner is an equalizing technique by reducing high-abundance proteins and enriching low-abundance proteins in biological liquids. With triton X-100/TBS buffer extraction, ProteoMiner enrichment, and peptide fractionation, 20 MPs (at least two non-nested unique peptides with more than eight a.a. length) with 60 unique peptides were identified from four human tissues including eight membrane/secreted proteins and five nucleus proteins. Then 15 of them were confirmed with two non-nested unique peptides (≥9 a.a.) identified by matching well with their chemically synthetic peptides in PRM assay. Hence, these results demonstrated ProteoMiner as a powerful means in discovery of MPs.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Materials, Chemicals, and Reagents
Human hepatoma and their adjacent tissues, colorectal cancer and their adjacent tissues were provided by China Xijing Hospital; human bladder cancer and adjacent tissues were obtained from Shenzhen second People’s Hospital (China); and human kidney tissues were supported by Nanjing General Hospital (China). Mice were cultured in the animal house of BGI, Shenzhen. All the clinical samples in this study were taken under surgery and all the patients signed informed consent forms. The protocol of sample collection and the data usage were submitted to and approved by The Ethics Committees in the three hospitals. Permission of BGI Animal Ethics Committee has been obtained for the use of animal tissues for this study. The scheme which stated the tissue sample pathological information and experimental flowchart was provided in Supplementary Figure 1.
All of the reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) or Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA) unless specified otherwise. The ProteoMiner Protein Enrichment Kits were purchased from Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA). Protease inhibitor cocktails were ordered from Roche (Basel, Switzerland). Trypsin for protein digestion was ordered from Progema (Madison, WI). Bovine serum albumin was obtained from Sangon Biotech (Shanghai, China). The peptides used for PRM assay were chemically synthesized by GL Biochem (Shanghai, China). Solutions for proteome extraction, purification, proteolysis, and fractionation were prepared with Milli-Q water (Merk Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), and solutions for subsequent steps were prepared with HPLC grade water (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).
Tissue Protein Extraction and Lower Abundance Protein Enrichment by ProteoMiner kit
Tissues were ground in a tissue lyser and further lysed by probe sonication in the extraction buffer of PBS (pH 7.5), HEPES (20 mM, pH 8.0), NH4HCO3 (50 mM, pH 8.0), or triton buffer (1% Triton X-100, 20 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4) with protease inhibitor cocktail at 0–4 °C. Bradford assay was adopted to measure the concentrations of extracted proteins with bovine serum albumin as a standard. Lower abundance proteins were enriched with ProteoMiner Protein Enrichment Kits according to manufacturer’s protocol. In brief, the columns were conditioned by the extraction buffer and then the extracted tissue proteins (5 mg) were loaded onto them (50 μL) under gravity speed. The nonspecific binding proteins were washed out by the same extraction buffer, and then the specific binding proteins were eluted by the elution buffer provided in the kits. The effects of depletion on higher abundance proteins were evaluated by protein recovery ratio and the images of SDS-PAGE gels to show the protein pattern changes with ProteoMiner treatment.
Protein Digestion and Peptide Desalting
After the enriched lower abundance proteins were eluted from the column, they were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (30 °C, 2 h) prior to alkylation in 55 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature in the dark, 45 min). The mixture of protein solutions was diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer to reduce the concentration of urea in the elution buffer to improve the efficiency of trypsin. The proteins were digested by trypsin (1:50) at 37 °C with overnight incubation. The resultant solution containing tryptic peptides was adjusted to pH 2–3 with TFA and desalted using Waters Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Milford, MA) following the procedure of conditioning (0.1% TFA), loading sample, washing (0.1% TFA), and elution (75% ACN with 0.1% TFA). The peptides were then dried using a speed-vac (LaboGene, Lynge, Denmark), dissolved by 5% ACN in ammonia (pH 9.8) for first dimensional separation.
First Dimensional Fractionation of Peptides
Desalted peptides were separated by a Gemini high-pH RP column (5 μm, 110 Å, 250 × 4.6 mm2, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) equipped on a Shimadzu UFLC system (Kyoto, Japan). Fractionation was performed over a 60 min period at a constant flow rate of 1 mL/min using a gradient of 5% B for 10 min, 5%–35% B for 40 min, 35%–95% B in 1 min, 95% B for 3 min, and dropped to 5% within 1 min before equilibrating with 5% B for 10 min (buffer A, 5% ACN in ammonia, pH 9.8; buffer B, 95% ACN in ammonia, pH 9.8). All 60 fractions were collected and pooled into 20 fractions by a concatenation mode. (33) Fractions were dried in a speed-vac (LaboGene, Lynge, Denmark).
Identification of Missing Proteins on Mass Spectrometry
The peptides (2 μg) were passed onto a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) for identification, in which a 300 μm × 5 mm C18 TRAP column (μ-Precolumn, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and a 75 μm × 25 cm in-house packed analytical column containing 3 μm Ultimate LP-C18 particles (120 Å) from Welch (Shanghai, China) were used. Each fraction was loaded on enrichment column at flow rate 5 μL/min for 5 min with buffer A (2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid), followed by a 115 min gradient at 300 nL/min: from 5% B (98% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) to 26% B in 85 min, to 35% B in 10 min, to 80% B in 10 min, at 80% B for 5 min, dropped to 5% within 0.5 min, and then kept at 5% B for 4.5 min. MS parameters were listed as following: spray voltage 2 kV, capillary temperature 320 °C, positive mode, scan range 350–1500 m/z, loop count 30, NCE 26, MS resolution 120 000, MS/MS HCD scans with resolution 30 000, dynamic exclusion duration 30 s; isolation window 2.0 m/z; intensity threshold 1.0 e4; charge exclusion, exclude 1,7,8,>8. Each fraction was injected twice for more confident identification.
Database Searching
Acquired MS data were converted to MGF files by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and the exported MGF files were searched using Mascot version 2.3.02 against the Swiss-prot human database (released on 2017_04 with 20 183 protein sequences) with a decoy database involved. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to less than 1% at both PSM and protein level during searching and automatically calculated by the software. Trypsin was selected as the specific enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages permitted per peptide. Parameters included fixed modification: Carbamidomethylation (C); variable modification: Oxidation (M), Deamidatioin (N, Q). Data were searched with a peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. The Mascot results were further processed by IQuant software by the Mascot Percolator to rescore the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) and the Occam’s razor approach to assemble the identified peptide sequences into a set of confident proteins. (34, 35) The protein level FDR was calculated by using the picked protein FDR strategy with setting of less than 1%. (36)
Confirmation of MP Identification by PRM
The .dat files of DDA data search results were put into Skyline and used to direct the extraction of peptides for PRM assay. (37) In this situation, only MP unique peptide sequences were input as baits to get their MS identification information used for direct PRM confirmation. The list of target peptides with m/z and sequence obtained from Skyline analysis was imported for targeted identification (Supplementary Table 1). PRM assay was also performed on a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with the same column used for DDA identification. The fractions with MP unique peptide identification were selected for PRM confirmation and separated with a 60 min gradient: 5 min with buffer A (2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid), from 5% B (98% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) to 30% B in 44 min, to 80% B in 3 min, at 80% B for 2 min, dropped to 5% within 1 min, and then kept at 5% B for 5 min. During PRM scan, the PRM mode was set, while most of MS parameters were kept as same as DDA identification, such as spray voltage, capillary temperature, resolution, polarity, AGC target, and scan range, except the maximum IT was set up at 250 ms for improvement of the detection sensitivity. The PRM data were processed by Skyline software with the following steps, selecting the settings for peptides and fragments based upon the guidelines of the software, inputting the information on target peptide list, importing PRM raw data files, locking the native peptides identification based on the database search, and the chromatographic and MS behaviors of synthetic peptides and finally exporting the results of comparison on RT and product ions peak area percentage for the native and synthetic peptides.

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

