=== TITLE ===
Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of Exosome Protein Content Changes Induced by Hepatitis B Virus in Huh-7 Cells Using SILAC Labeling and LC–MS/MS

=== ABSTRACT ===
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection could cause hepatitis, liver cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. HBV-mediated pathogenesis is only partially understood, but X protein (HBx) reportedly possesses oncogenic potential. Exosomes are small membrane vesicles with diverse functions released by various cells including hepatocytes, and HBV harnesses cellular exosome biogenesis and export machineries for virion morphogenesis and secretion. Therefore, HBV infection might cause changes in exosome contents with functional implications for both virus and host. In this work, exosome protein content changes induced by HBV and HBx were quantitatively analyzed by SILAC/LC–MS/MS. Exosomes prepared from SILAC-labeled hepatoma cell line Huh-7 transfected with HBx, wildtype, or HBx-null HBV replicon plasmids were analyzed by LC–MS/MS. Systematic analyses of MS data and confirmatory immunoblotting showed that HBx overexpression and HBV, with or without HBx, replication in Huh-7 cells indeed caused marked and specific changes in exosome protein contents. Furthermore, specific changes in protein contents were also detected in exosomes purified from HBV-infected patients’ sera compared with control sera negative for HBV markers. These results illustrate a new aspect of interactions between HBV and the host and provide the foundation for future research into roles played by exosomes in HBV infection and pathogenesis.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Chemicals, Plasmids, and Antibodies
The components of common and labeling cell culture media were purchased from Invitrogen or Sigma. l-Arginine:HCI (U-13C6, 99%), l-arginine:HCl (U-13C6, 99%; 15N4, 99%), l-lysine-2HCl (4,4,5,5-D4, 96–98%), and l-lysine-2HCl (U13C6, 98%; 15N2, 98%) were purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories (Andover, MA). Sequencing-grade trypsin was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI).
For overexpression of HBx, HBx-encoding sequences (GenBank Accession AAD16255.1) were amplified by conventional PCR and cloned downstream of CMV promoter with an N-terminal HA tag in pcDNA3 (Invitrogen) to create pCMV-HA-HBx. The empty vector pCMV was used as negative control. Plasmids carrying terminally redundant 1.1× copy wild type (pCMV-HBV1.1 (35)) and its derivative HBx-null mutant [pCMV-HBV1.1(X–)] HBV genomes under the control of CMV promoter were kindly provided by Professor Yongxiang Wang of Fudan University (Supplementary Figure 1B in the Supporting Information). Terminal redundancy of HBV genomic sequences contained in these plasmids is required for productive HBV replication upon transfection due to the circular nature of viral genome (Supplementary Figure 1A in the Supporting Information). In pCMV-HBV1.1(X–), amino acid 8 of HBx ORF was mutated to stop codon through site-directed mutagenesis without causing amino acid changes in the overlapping polymerase ORF. (36) EGFP-expressing plasmid pEGFP (Clonetech) was used in all transfections as transfection efficiency control.
Antibodies against ALIX/PDCP6IP (A2215), AZGP1 (A5365), CANX (A0803), FASN (A6273), TSG101 (A2216), and VCP (A2795) were purchased from ABclonal; antibody against CTNNB1 (BD610154) was obtained from BD Biosciences; peroxidase-labeled β-actin antibody was purchased from Sigma (A3854); HSP90B1/Grp94 antibody was obtained from CST (2104); EGFP antibody was from Abmart (M20004); mouse monoclonal anti-HBx antibody was custom produced by Abmart and has been previously described; (37) and rabbit anti-HBcAg antibody was purchased from DAKO (P0586).
Cell Culture and SILAC Labeling
Huh-7 cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/mL penicillin G/streptomycin sulfate, and 10 mM HEPES at 37 °C and 5% CO2. SILAC labeling was performed by culturing cells in labeling media containing medium (R6K4) or heavy (R10K8) amino acids for more than seven passages, as previously described. (38) Labeling efficiency was confirmed by analyzing β-actin-derived peptides after trypsin digestion of samples from labeled cells using MALDI-TOF 4700 MALDI TOF/TOF proteomics analyzer (Applied Biosystems) as reported previously. (38)
Transfection and Exosome Preparation
Exosome-depleted serum was prepared by ultracentrifuging normal FBS at 100 000g for 16 h, followed by filtering the supernatant through 0.22 μm syringe filter (Millipore) and used for all transfection cultures. Prior to transfection, 106 unlabeled or labeled Huh-7 cells were seeded into 10 cm diameter culture dishes. After overnight growth, cells were transfected using Turbofect (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. 24 h later, cells were changed into fresh media. Fresh media were exchanged 48 h later, and culture media collected at 48 and 96 h post transfection were pooled together and stored at 4 °C. Two independent replications were performed for each transfection, and the collected media supernatants were processed in parallel in subsequent steps.
Exosomes were purified using a differential centrifugation protocol as previously described. (39, 40) Briefly, culture media were sequentially centrifuged at 300g for 10 min and 2000g for 20 min to eliminate cell and cell debris contamination. The cleared supernatants were further centrifuged at 10 000g for 30 min at 4 °C, and exosomes were pelleted from the supernatants by ultracentrifugation at 100 000g using an SW32 rotor (Beckman) for 60 min at 4 °C. The exosome pellets were resuspended in PBS and ultracentrifuged again at 100 000g using an SW41 rotor (Beckman) for 60 min at 4 °C. Purified exosomes were resuspended in PBS and used immediately or stored at −80 °C.
Immunoblotting
Protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred onto PVDF membranes at 100 V for 80 min using Trans-blot Turbo system (Bio-Rad). The membranes were blocked with PBST containing 5% nonfat milk and incubated with the specified primary antibodies overnight, followed by incubation with secondary antibody conjugated with horseradish peroxidase. ECL substrate (Millipore) was added to the membranes, and images were captured using ChemiDoc XRS+ (Bio-Rad).
Analysis of HBV Antigen and DNA
HBsAg and HBeAg were quantified using the commercial AxSYM HBsAg and HBeAg immunoassays (Abbott). Extraction of intracellular capsid-associated HBV DNA and analysis by Southern hybridization were performed as previously described. (41)
MS Sample Preparation
Purified exosomes were lysed in RIPA buffer containing 1% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitors (Beyotime) and total protein concentration was determined using Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Equal amounts of heavy (R10K8) and light (unlabeled) or heavy, medium (R6K4), and light samples were then pooled together. Two methods were employed for protein digestion and peptide generation. In Method I, pooled samples were separated by 12% SDS-PAGE followed by silver staining. SDS-PAGE gel was then cut into slices, and in-gel trypsin digestion was performed as previously described. (42) In Method II, electrophoresis separation step was omitted and pooled samples were boiled in 1× SDS-PAGE loading buffer and directly embedded in PAGE gel by mixing with 12% PAGE solution prior to gelling. Gels were then sliced, washed with double-distilled water, and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion as previously described.
LC–MS/MS
LC–MS/MS experiments were performed at the core facility of Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University on a hybrid quadrupole Orbitrap (Q-Exactive) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a Nano Aquity UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). Tryptic peptides were redissolved in 10 μL of 0.1% FA solution and chromatographically separated on an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm × 15 cm). Each sample was loaded in solvent A (98% H2O/2% ACN/0.1% FA), followed by gradient elution of 2–40% solvent B (5% H2O/95% ACN/0.1% FA) over 120 min with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The electrospray voltage of 2.2 kV versus the inlet of the mass spectrometer was used. The 15 most abundant precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan (m/z range of 350–1200, R = 70 000) were isolated with a 3 m/z mass window for further high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS analysis with a resolution of 17 500. Spectra were acquired under automatic gain control (AGC) for survey spectra (AGC: 106) and MS/MS spectra (AGC: 105). In all cases, one microscan was recorded using dynamic exclusion of 30 s. For MS/MS, precursor ions were activated using 27% normalized collision energy and an activation time of 30 ms.
Protein Identification and Quantification
Protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant (43) version 1.4.1.2 and UniProtKB Homo sapiens reference proteome database containing 88 479 canonical and isoform sequences (39 748 UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and 48 731 UniProtKB/TrEMBL entries, retrieved Jan 2014) through MaxQuant’s built-in Andromeda search engine. HBV protein sequences were manually translated from corresponding nucleic acid sequences and used for HBV peptide identification in relevant samples. Default parameters in MaxQuant were used wherever applicable. Briefly, variable modifications included protein N-terminus acetylation, and oxidized methionine and fixed modification included carbamidomethylated cysteine. Full trypsin specificity was selected as digestion mode and max missed cleavages were set to 2. Peptides with lengths of a minimum of 7 amino acids were considered, with both the peptide and protein FDR set to 1%. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. Product ions were searched with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm. Protein identification required a minimum of two peptides with at least one razor or unique peptide. Relative ratio quantification was performed using quantities of unique and razor peptides and required a minimum of two peptides. Protein groups marked as contaminant, reverse, or “identified by site only” in MaxQuant results were discarded. Only protein groups identified in both biological replicates using at least one of the two methods of sample preparation (see above) were collected for subsequent analyses. The mass spectrometry proteomics data, including raw MS data, MaxQuant search parameter files, and result files, have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (44) via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD001339.
Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG Pathway Annotations and Statistical Analysis
Protein groups identified by MaxQuant were imported to Perseus (45) version 1.4.1.3 for Gene Ontology Cellular Component (GOCC), Molecular Function (GOMF) and Biological Process (GOBP) as well as KEGG annotation followed by statistical analysis. Normalized protein group quantity relative ratios were first logarithmized to base 2, and significantly changed protein groups were identified using Significance A (43) calculation in Perseus with default parameters (threshold value 0.05). Annotations with significantly changed ratio distribution compared with all quantifiable protein groups in each comparison were then identified using 1D annotation enrichment (45) analysis in Perseus using default parameters (threshold value 0.02).
Human Sera Collection, Exosome Preparation, and Immunoblotting Analysis
HBV-negative and HBV-positive human sera were collected from health check and outpatient departments of Putuo District Center Hospital, Shanghai. For analysis of multiple exosome proteins, sera from 4 to 6 patients or health check recipients were pooled together, respectively, to achieve a final volume of 2–5 mL. For analysis of VCP in exosomes, 0.4 to 1 mL serum from individual subjects was used without pooling. Exosomes were prepared from pooled or individual sera using the same protocol as that used for transfection supernatant previously described. After total protein quantification, exosome proteins were analyzed by immunoblotting.


=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

