=== TITLE ===
Proteome-Wide Discovery of Unknown ATP-Binding Proteins and Kinase Inhibitor Target Proteins Using an ATP Probe

=== ABSTRACT ===
ATP-binding proteins, including protein kinases, play essential roles in many biological and pathological processes and thus these proteins are attractive as drug targets. Acyl-ATP probes have been developed as efficient probes for kinase enrichment, and these probes have also been used to enrich other ATP-binding proteins. However, a robust method to identify ATP-binding proteins with systematic elimination of nonspecific binding proteins has yet to be established. Here, we describe an ATP competition assay that permitted establishment of a rigorous ATP-binding protein list with virtual elimination of nonspecific proteins. A total of 539 ATP-binding protein candidates were identified, including 178 novel candidates. In informatics analysis, ribosomal proteins were overrepresented in the list of novel candidates. We also found multiple ATP-competitive sites for several kinases, including epidermal growth factor receptor, serine/threonine-protein kinase PRP4 homologue, cyclin-dependent kinase 12, eukaryotic elongation factor 2 kinase, ribosomal protein S6 kinase alpha-1, and SRSF protein kinase 1. Using our cataloged ATP-binding protein list, a selectivity profiling method that covers the kinome and ATPome was established to identify off-target binding sites of ATP-competitive kinase inhibitors, staurosporine and crizotinib.


=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Materials

An ActivX desthiobiotin-ATP probe, Halt protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, Zeba spin desalting column (7K MWCO), and high-capacity-binding streptavidin agarose were obtained from Thermo Scientific (Rockford, IL). Modified trypsin, complete protease inhibitor cocktail, and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail were purchased from Roche Applied Science (Mannheim, Germany). Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), fetal bovine serum (FBS), dialyzed FBS, penicillin, and streptomycin were from Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA). (S)-Crizotinib was obtained from APEXbio (Houston, TX). 13C6,15N4-l-arginine hydrochloride and 13C6,15N2-l-lysine hydrochloride were purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories (Tewksbury, MA). Unless otherwise noted, all other chemicals were obtained from Wako (Osaka, Japan).
Cell Culture and Lysis

HeLa-S3 cells for label-free experiments were grown in DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum plus antibiotics in 10% CO2 at 37 °C. HeLa-S3 cells for SILAC experiments were cultured in DMEM as described by Ong et al. (11) Briefly, DMEM was supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum and either 28.0 mg/L normal isotopic abundance arginine and 48.7 mg/L normal isotopic abundance lysine (light) or 28.0 mg/L arginine with six 13C and four 15N atoms and 48.7 mg/L lysine with six 13C and two 15N atoms (heavy). The efficiency of labeling was estimated to be 99.5% for lysine and 98.5% for arginine after five passages, and labeled cells were used for spike-in SILAC experiments. Approximately 5 × 108 cells were centrifuged, washed with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and lysed with 5 mL of ice-cold lysis buffer (25 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% CHAPS, 1% Nonidet P-40, protease inhibitor cocktail, and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail). The lysate was aliquoted, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C.
ATP Probe Labeling, In-Solution Digestion, and Affinity Purification

Cell lysate was centrifuged at 16 000g at 4 °C for 5 min, and the resulting supernatant was collected and subjected to gel filtration using a Zeba spin column (Pierce) to remove free endogenous ATP, ADP, and small molecules. Halt protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail was then added to the sample. Protein concentrations were determined by DC protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA), and the cell lysate was diluted with reaction buffer (20 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100) to a final protein concentration of 4 mg/mL. MnCl2 was added to 250 μL of lysate (1 mg of protein) at a final concentration of 20 mM. The labeling reaction in the ATP-competition assay was carried out at a final concentration of 5 μM ATP probe at room temperature with gentle shaking for 10 min, following preincubation with ATP for 10 min. After the reaction, the sample was denatured by 5 M urea, reduced with DTT (5 mM final concentration), and alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM final concentration). The labeling reaction in the kinase inhibitor experiment was performed similarly, with minor modifications. Kinase inhibitors were preincubated for 10 min with SILAC-labeled light lysate (1 mg of protein), whereas SILAC-labeled heavy lysate (1 mg of protein) was not treated with kinase inhibitors. Concentrations of kinase inhibitors were determined to cover IC50 values from previous studies. (7b) After denaturation with urea, heavy lysate was spiked into an equal amount of light lysate. After the alkylation step, the solution was substituted by digestion buffer by gel filtration followed by digestion at 37 °C overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:100. Immobilized streptavidin agarose resin was used to capture the labeled peptides. Prior to binding, 50 μL of slurry was washed three times with 500 μL of elution buffer (50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) and three times with 500 μL of digestion buffer. After addition to the digested peptide solution, the mixture was incubated at room temperature for 1 h with gentle rotation. To remove the unbound peptides, agarose resin was extensively washed with 2 mL of washing buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Nonidet P-40, and 5% glycerol), 2 mL of PBS, and 2 mL of pure H2O. After washing, labeled peptides were eluted with 150 μL of elution buffer (50% ACN, 0.1% TFA) twice and dried in a SpeedVac. Peptides were dissolved in 50 μL of 2 M urea and 1% TFA and desalted using StageTips. (12) Each experiment was performed in triplicate or quadruplicate.
LC–MS/MS Analysis

StageTip-purified peptides were eluted in a final volume of 10 μL. Liquid chromatography was performed with an UltiMate 3000 Nano LC system (Thermo Scientific) and a HTC-PAL autosampler (CTC Analytics, Zwingen, Switzerland). Peptides were separated on a fused silica column (300 mm length × 75 μm i.d.) packed in-house with reverse-phase material ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) at 60 °C. The mobile phases consisted of buffer A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile) and B (0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile). Samples were dissolved in 1% TFA and 2% acetonitrile and loaded onto a trap column (0.075 × 20 mm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC Nano-Trap Column; Thermo Scientific). The nanoLC gradient was delivered at 280 nL/min and consisted of a linear gradient of buffer B developed from 5 to 30% B in 85 min. The Q Exactive instrument was operated in data-dependent mode. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350–1800) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70 000 after accumulation of ions to a 3 × 106 target value. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. The 12 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially accumulated to a 2 × 105 target value and fragmented in the octopole collision cell by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and a resolution of 35 000. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 2 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250 °C; normalized HCD collision energy, 25%. The MS/MS ion selection threshold was set to 5 × 104 counts. A 3.0 Da isolation width was chosen.
Analysis of Proteomic Data

Raw data were processed by MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 supported by the Andromeda search engine for peptide identification. (13) MaxQuant was used to score peptides for identification based on a search with an initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 7 ppm. The allowed fragment mass deviation was 20 ppm. Search of MS/MS spectra against the UniProt human database (release 2011_11) combined with 262 common contaminants was performed using the Andromeda search engine. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys with allowed cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of three missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and desthiobiotinylated lysine (+196.1212 Da), as variable modifications. Peptides and proteins were accepted with a false discovery rate of <1%, which was estimated on the basis of the number of accepted hits from the reverse database. Feature matching between raw files was enabled for ATP competition data sets using a retention time window of 2 min. To extract ATP-competitive peptides/sites from label-free quantitation data, we removed peptides that were inhibited by <80% at 10 μM ATP. Peptides with quantitation values that were not reproducible were also rejected, based on an average of <0.5 for three correlation coefficients of intensity values in triplicate experiments (correlation coefficients of experiments 1 and 2, 2 and 3, 3 and 1); 89.6% of peptides were rejected by this filter. MS spectra for all ATP-competitive peptides were checked for missed assignments by matching between raw files, and 946 peptides (4.3% of all peptides) passed all criteria and were recognized as ATP-competitive peptides. In the kinase inhibitor experiment, spike-in SILAC quantitation was used instead of label-free quantitation. Peptides inhibited by >50% at 10 μM staurosporine were accepted. MS spectra for all target peptides were checked manually. A list of identified proteins and peptides is given in Supporting Information Table S1.

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

