=== TITLE ===
Proteomic and Bioinformatic Characterization of Extracellular Vesicles Released from Human Macrophages upon Influenza A Virus Infection

=== ABSTRACT ===
Influenza A viruses (IAVs) are aggressive pathogens that cause acute respiratory diseases and annual epidemics in humans. Host defense against IAV infection is initiated by macrophages, which are the principal effector cells of the innate immune system. We have previously shown that IAV infection of human macrophages is associated with robust secretion of proteins via conventional and unconventional protein release pathways. Here we have characterized unconventional, extracellular vesicle (EV)-mediated protein secretion in human macrophages during IAV infection using proteomics, bioinformatics, and functional studies. We demonstrate that at 9 h postinfection a robust EV-mediated protein secretion takes place. We identified 2359 human proteins from EVs of IAV-infected macrophages compared with 1448 proteins identified from EVs of control cells. Bioinformatic analysis shows that many proteins involved in translation, like components of spliceosome machinery and the ribosome, are secreted in EVs in response to IAV infection. Our data also shows that EVs derived from IAV-infected macrophages contain fatty acid-binding proteins, antiviral cytokines, copper metabolism Murr-1 domain proteins, and autophagy-related proteins. In addition, our data suggest that secretory autophagy plays a role in activating EV-mediated protein secretion during IAV infection.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Cell Culture and Infections

Human macrophages were derived from leukocyte-rich buffy coats from healthy blood donors (Finnish Red Cross Blood Transfusion Service, Helsinki, Finland). Monocytes (three donors per experiment) were isolated and differentiated into macrophages as previously described. (19) In total, 1.4 × 106 monocytes were seeded per well on six-well plates. The monocytes were cultured in serum-free macrophage media (Macrophage-SFM, Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) supplemented with 10 ng/mL granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) (ImmunoTools, Germany) and 50 U/mL penicillin–streptomycin (Lonza, Basel, Switzerland) at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 6 days, polarizing the monocytes into macrophages of the acute pro-inflammatory M1-phenotype. On day six the cells were washed with PBS, supplied with fresh RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco) supplemented with l-glutamate and antibiotics, and subsequently infected with human pathogenic influenza A (H3N2) strain Udorn/72 (2.56 hemagglutination unit/mL) for the times indicated.
Sample Preparation

For EV isolation, 9 h cell culture supernatants from untreated and IAV-infected macrophages were collected and centrifuged at 500g for 10 min to remove suspended cells and further at 3000g for 30 min to remove residual cell debris. Cleared cell culture supernatants were concentrated with Amicon 100 kDa MWCO centrifugal filter units (Millipore) and EVs were isolated by ultracentrifugation, as previously described. (20)
For proteomic analysis and Western blotting, washed EV pellets were solubilized in Laemmli sample buffer before SDS-PAGE. For electron microscopy (EM), washed EV pellet was fixed with 2% PFA in PBS and directly used for EM grids preparation.
For total secretome analysis by SDS-PAGE and silver staining or Western blotting, the culture medium was centrifuged at 400g to remove detached cells and cell debris and subsequently concentrated 50–100-fold on 10 kDa MWCO centrifugal filter units (Millipore).
Electron Microscopy of Vesicles

The EM of vesicles was performed as described by Théry et al. (21) with minor modifications. In brief, 5 μL of fixed exosome suspension was transferred to Pioloform carbon-coated copper grids and allowed to absorb for 20 min. The grids were subsequently washed and contrasted with uranyl acetate, embedded in the mixture of uranyl acetate and methyl cellulose, and dried. Vesicles were observed at 80 kV with Jeol JEM-1400 transmission electron microscope in the Electron Microscopy Unit, Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki.
Proteomic Analysis using GeLC–MS/MS

Human macrophages were infected with influenza A virus (H3N2/Udorn strain, HA 256) for 9 h or left untreated. We analyzed two independent biological replicates with cells from three individual donors each. EVs were isolated from equal supernatant volumes (40–60 mL of medium per condition) by ultracentrifugation, then washed in PBS, and pelleted again. The washed EV pellet was solubilized in Laemmli sample buffer, and the proteins were identified using GeLC–MS/MS as previously described. (22) In brief, the proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and silver-stained, and the gel lanes were cut into five to six pieces. The proteins were reduced with 20 mM dithiotreitol for 30 min in 56 °C, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark, and in-gel-digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight in 37 °C. The peptides were eluted twice with 0.1% TFA/50% ACN, dried, and solubilized in 40 μL of 0.1% TFA for mass spectrometry analysis.
Each peptide mixture was analyzed by automated nanoflow capillary LC–MS/MS using an EASY nanoLC 1000 (Proxeon, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Aclaim Pepmap 100 (75 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, Proxeon, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was used as the trap column. Reverse-phase separation of peptides was carried out using a 75 μm × 15 cm Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mobile phases were 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (A) and 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (B). Peptides were eluted from the column with a linear gradient of 5–35% solvent B in 90 min. Fractions with very high peptide concentration were reanalyzed with a 3 h separation gradient.
Data-dependent acquisition was performed in positive ion mode. MS spectra were acquired from m/z 400 to m/z 1800 at a resolution of 70 000 at m/z 200 with a target value of 1 000 000 and maximum injection time of 80 ms. The 10 most abundant precursor ions of which charge states were 2+ or higher were selected for higher energy collisional dissociation with an isolation window of 2 and normalized collision energy of 27. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17 500 at m/z 200 with a target value of 50 000 and maximum injection time of 100 ms, without a lowest fixed mass defined. Dynamic exclusion duration was 30 s.
The obtained MS/MS spectra were searched with the Mascot database search engine (version 2.4.0) through the Proteome Discoverer 1.4.0.288 interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) against the SwissProt database (SwissProt 2015_11, 549 832 sequences, 196 078 138 residues). The data were processed separately for the two biological replicates. The search criteria specified trypsin as the digestion enzyme, fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications: oxidation (M), and deamidation (N, Q). Precursor masses were defined to be between 350 and 5000 kDa, precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was 20 mmu. Maximum missed cleavage sites were set to 2 and preferred taxonomy to “human”. The maximum p value for identification confidence was 0.05. The false discovery rate (FDR) was determined with a decoy database, target FDR (Strict): 0.01, target FDR (Relaxed): 0.05, based on q values.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (23) partner repository with the data set identifier PXD004424.
Bioinformatic Analysis

For gene ontology (GO) classification and KEGG pathway analysis the proteomics data of EVs from IAV-infected and control cells from two biological replicates were combined into one IAV and one Control file. These two data sets were then submitted to EnrichR. (24) The output files of the enrichment analysis were tables that included p values, Benjamini–Hochberg adjusted p values, the z score of the deviation from the expected rank, as well as the “combined score”, which is the combination of the p value with the z score by multiplying these two numbers as follows: c = ln(p)·z. The adjusted p values instead of regular p values were used in all analyses for additional level of confidence.
To compare the most differentially enriched GO terms between the two conditions, we used R (R Core Team (2013). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R (Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. http://www.R-project.org/)) to define the absolute difference between the two adjusted p values under the two conditions.
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (IPA, Ingenuity Systems, Mountain View, CA, www.ingenuity.com) was used for mapping the identified proteins into “Subcellular location and molecular type”, “Canonical Pathways”, and “Diseases and biological functions”.
Western Blotting

The protein samples were denatured at 95 °C for 5 min and separated on SDS-PAGE, transferred to Immobilon-P (PVDF) transfer membranes (Millipore), blocked with 5% nonfat milk solution in TBS-Tween (TBS-T), and incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies. The membranes were washed with TBS-T and incubated with appropriate HRP-conjugated secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature and after that washed with TBS-T and visualized with Western Lightning ECL (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA).
The antibodies against annexin 1 (sc-12740), alix (sc-53540), GAPR-1 (sc-398783), E-FABP (sc-365166), and MDGI (sc-58275) were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). The antibody against CD11c (ITGAX, ab52632) was purchased from Abcam PLC (Cambridge, UK). Secondary antibodies were purchased from Dako (Dako Denmark A/S).
GAPR-1 Silencing

On day 5 of cell culture in 12-well plates, macrophages were transfected with 100 nM nontargeting control small interfering RNA (siRNA, AllStars Negative Control siRNA, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and with 50 nM each of two GAPR-1 siRNAs (FlexiTube siRNA 5 nmol, Qiagen: Hs_C9orf19_8, Hs_C9orf19_6; final concentration = 100 nM) using HiPerFect Transfection Reagent (Qiagen), according to the manufacturer’s instruction. After 3 h of siRNA treatment, cells were supplemented with fresh macrophage-SFM. On the following day, the siRNA treatment was repeated and cells were left unstimulated or infected with IAV for 9 h, after which the cell-culture supernatants were collected and concentrated with Amicon 10 kDa MWCO filter units (Millipore), and proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized with silver staining and Western blotting.

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

