=== TITLE ===
The Primary Effect on the Proteome of ARID1A-mutated Ovarian Clear Cell Carcinoma is Downregulation of the Mevalonate Pathway at the Post-transcriptional Level

=== ABSTRACT ===
Inactivating mutations in ARID1A, which encodes a subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex, are found in over half of ovarian clear cell carcinoma cases and more broadly across most types of cancers. To identify ARID1A-dependent changes in intracellular signaling pathways, we performed proteome analyses of isogenic ovarian clear cell carcinoma cell lines with or without ARID1A expression. Knockout of ARID1A in an ovarian clear cell carcinoma cell line with wild-type ARID1A, OVCA429, primarily resulted in downregulation of the mevalonate pathway, an important metabolic pathway involved in isoprenoid synthesis, cholesterol synthesis, and other downstream pathways. In a complementary experiment, expression of wild-type ARID1A in an ovarian clear cell carcinoma cell line containing mutated ARID1A, OVISE, affected the mevalonate pathway in a reciprocal manner. A striking aspect of these analyses was that, although only 5% of the detected proteome showed significant abundance changes, most proteins in the mevalonate pathway were coordinately affected by ARID1A status. There were generally corresponding changes when comparing the proteomics data to our previously published microarray data for ectopic expression of ARID1A in the OVISE cell line. However, ARID1A-dependent changes were not detected for genes within the mevalonate pathway. This discrepancy suggests that the mevalonate pathway is not regulated directly by ARID1A-mediated transcription and may be regulated post-transcriptionally. We conclude that ARID1A status indirectly influences the mevalonate pathway and probably influences other processes including glycogen metabolism and 14-3-3-mediated signaling. Further, our findings demonstrate that changes in mRNA levels are sometimes poor indicators of signaling pathways affected by gene manipulations in cancer cells.
Epithelial ovarian cancer is the fifth highest cause of cancer mortality among women in the United States with an estimated death toll of 14,240 in 2016 (1). Ovarian clear cell carcinomas (OCCC)1 accounts for an average of 5% of all epithelial ovarian cancers with occurrence rates greater than 20% in certain Asian populations (2). OCCC tumors are refractory to standard treatment regimens and carry a poor prognosis at late-stage detection (3).
OCCC cells have a distinct phenotype compared with other ovarian cancer histological subtypes that includes cytosolic glycogen stores that give them their characteristic “clear” appearance and a unique gene signature (4, 5). Loss-of-function mutations in ARID1A are found in the majority of OCCCs and one-third of ovarian endometrioid carcinomas (6, 7). ARID1A mutations are also prevalent in cancers of other tissues, including subtypes of breast and gastric cancers (8–10). ARID1A encodes the ARID1A/BAF250a subunit of the switch/sucrose nonfermentable (SWI/SNF) chromatin remodeling complex, an epigenetic regulator that modulates gene expression and DNA repair through nucleosome repositioning (11, 12). ARID1A may confer sequence specificity to the SWI/SNF complex through its inherent DNA-binding activity (13–16) or via interactions with transcriptional regulators such as p53 (17). Mutation of ARID1A likely drives cancer progression by increasing dependence on alternative SWI/SNF complexes (18) with partially overlapping transcriptional profiles (19).
Efforts to uncover the global effects of ARID1A mutation in OCCC have thus focused primarily on changes in gene transcription. Mutation of ARID1A in OCCC cells results in loss of homeostasis between SWI/SNF and polycomb repressive complex 2, which were found to antagonistically regulate gene expression (20). Restoring wild-type ARID1A or inhibiting EZH2, the catalytic subunit of polycomb repressive complex 2, inhibits Phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT signaling through up-regulation of PIK3IP1. Profiling of ARID1A-deficient tumors in a mouse ovarian cancer model showed enrichment for genes associated with mesenchymal-epithelial transition (21). However, steady-state protein levels are often better indicators of the functional state of the cell (22). A preliminary targeted proteome approach using reverse phase protein arrays profiled 31 OCCC tumor samples with known ARID1A mutational status using 116 antibodies and observed differential expression of pAKT-Thr308 (23).
To better understand the global impact of ARID1A loss-of-function mutations on intracellular signaling networks, we assessed changes in the proteome because of ARID1A knockout in a ARID1A wild-type OCCC cell line, OVCA429, in an unbiased, in-depth manner using high resolution LC-MS/MS. Although ARID1A status had a minimal impact on the proteome overall, extensive effects on specific metabolic signaling pathways were observed. Notably, enzymes that function in the mevalonate pathway, which is involved in critical processes such as cholesterol biosynthesis and protein prenylation, showed decreased protein levels when ARID1A expression was abrogated. We validated these findings in an ARID1A-mutated OCCC cell line, OVISE, and observed an increase in abundance of mevalonate pathway enzymes when wild-type ARID1A was ectopically expressed. These results suggest a potential mechanism by which ARID1A mutation may contribute to OCCC progression and provides potential therapeutic targets for this difficult to treat form of ovarian cancer.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Cell Lines and 2D Culturing Conditions
OVCA429 parental cell line and OVISE cell line expressing tetracycline-inducible wild-type ARID1A (17) originated from the laboratory of I. M. Shih. Cell lines were tested for mycoplasma (University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Cell Culture Services). All cell lines were cultured on polystyrene in a 2D format in the presence of 5% CO2 at 37 °C. OVCA429 cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 (Corning, Corning, NY, cat. no. 10–092-CM) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FCS (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, cat. no. F4135). OVISE cells expressing inducible wild-type ARID1A were maintained in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% Tet System Approved FCS (Clontech, Mountain View, CA, cat. no. 631107). All media contained 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (Corning, cat. no. 30-002-CI).
Construction and Use of CRISPR Plasmids
The Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) plasmids were a kind gift from Dr. Cigall Kadoch. ARID1A-specific guide RNA (gRNA; 5′-CGGGTTGCCCAGGCTGCTGGcgg-3′) was inserted into pSpCas9 (BB)-2A-Puro (PX459) using AgeI/EcoRI. Fugene6 (Promega, Madison, WI) transfection agent was utilized to transfect plasmid into cells and cells were selected with puromycin (1 μg/ml). Isogenic clonal cell lines were established based on ARID1A protein expression.
Immunoblotting
Primary antibodies used for immunoblots were ARID1A (Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA, cat. no. 12354) at 1:1000 and GAPDH (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. G8795) at 1:100,000. Secondary antibodies were Peroxidase-conjugated Anti-Rabbit IgG (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. A0545) at 1:50,000 and Peroxidase-conjugated Anti-Mouse IgG (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. A9044) at 1:50,000.
Sample Preparation for Proteome Analysis
OVCA429 cells were plated on tissue culture-treated Petri dishes (Corning, cat. no. 430599). OVISE cells harboring inducible wild-type ARID1A were similarly plated and treated with either DMSO or 1 μg/ml doxycycline in DMSO to induce ARID1A expression (96 h treatment duration, refreshed after 72 h). Cells were harvested at 60–80% confluency. Cell lysates were prepared using SDS lysis buffer (50 mm Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mm NaCl, 1% SDS, 1 mm EDTA) with freshly added 1 mm DTT and protease inhibitors (150 μm PMSF, 1 μg/ml Pepstatin A, and 1 μg/ml Leupeptin). Lysates were sonicated briefly to shear genomic DNA. Protein content of clarified lysates was quantified by Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Boston, MA, cat. no. 23227). For proteome analyses, 12.5 to 25 μg lysate was separated on 10% Bis-Tris NuPAGE minigels (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. NP0301) with MES running buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. NP0002) until the dye front migrated 0.5 cm. In-gel trypsin digestion was performed as described previously (24).
Proteome Analysis
LC-MS/MS of tryptic peptides was performed using a nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters, Milford, MA) in-line with a Q Exactive Plus or Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Typically, 0.25–1 μg of each tryptic digest, estimated assuming a 50% recovery of the amount of protein loaded into the gel lane, was loaded onto a 180 μm x 20 mm nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 trap column with 5 μm particle size and 100 angstrom pore size (Waters, cat. no. 186006527) with 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (solvent A). Analytical separation was performed on a 1.7 μm x 250 mm nanoACQUITY UPLC Peptide BEH C18 column with 1.7 μm particle size and 130 angstrom pore size (Waters, cat. no. 186003546) using a 245 min gradient with 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B) as follows: 5–30% B over 225 min, 30–80% B over 5 min, and constant 80% B for 15 min. A blank was run between each sample to minimize carryover by injecting water and using a 30 min gradient with the same solvents. Peptides were analyzed using the same parameters for the Q Exactive Plus and HF instruments unless otherwise indicated. Full MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 70,000 for the Plus and 60,000 for the HF with a scan range of 400–2000 m/z in profile mode. Full MS automatic gain control target and maximum injection time were set to 3e6 and 50 ms, respectively. MS2 spectra were recorded at 17,500 resolution for the Plus and 15,000 resolution for the HF. MS2 automatic gain control target and maximum injection time were set to 5e4 and 50 ms, respectively. Data-dependent analysis was performed on the 20 most abundant ions using an isolation width of 1.5 m/z and an underfill of 1%, corresponding to a minimum threshold of 1e4. Peptide match was set to preferred, and unassigned and singly charged ions were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s for the Plus and 45 s for the HF.
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale
All experimental and control samples were analyzed using biological triplicates to allow for robust statistics when performing label-free quantitative comparisons. This is more advantageous than technical replicates as it accounts for variability between cell culture plates and at all stages of sample preparation and processing. The OVCA429 and OVISE proteome comparisons each generated 6 RAW files, 3 corresponding to experimental conditions and three corresponding to control, that contain all acquired Full MS and MS2 spectra. Base peak chromatograms were inspected visually in Xcalibur Qual Browser version 3.0.63 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). RAW files were processed by MaxQuant version 1.5.1.2 using default parameters unless otherwise specified (http://www.maxquant.org) (25). All RAW files for a given parental cell line were analyzed together in a single MaxQuant run. Database searches were performed using the Andromeda search engine included with the MaxQuant release (26) with the UniProt human sequence database (July 28, 2014; 145,433 sequences; 53,453,851 residues) and an in-house contaminants database of common laboratory contaminants, including keratins, bovine proteins detected in FCS, trypsin, and mycoplasma proteins to detect potential mycoplasma contamination of cell cultures (Sequences obtained from UniProt, July 28, 2014; 3671 sequences; 1,338,375 residues). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm in the main search, and fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Digestion enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. A minimum peptide length of 7 residues was required for identification. Up to 5 modifications per peptide were allowed; acetylation (protein N-terminal) and oxidation (Met) were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as a fixed modification. No Andromeda score threshold was set for unmodified peptides. A minimum Andromeda score of 40 was required for modified peptides. Peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were both set to 1% based off a target-decoy reverse database. Proteins that shared all identified peptides were combined into a single protein group. If all identified peptides from one protein were a subset of identified peptides from another protein, these proteins were also combined into that group. Peptides that matched multiple protein groups (“razor” peptides) were assigned to the protein group with the most unique peptides. “Match between runs” based on accurate m/z and retention time was enabled with a 0.7 min match time window and 20 min alignment time window. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm built into MaxQuant (27). Briefly, peaks were detected in Full MS, and a three-dimensional peak was constructed as a function of peak centroid m/z (7.5 ppm threshold) and peak area over time. Following de-isotoping, peptide intensities were determined by extracted ion chromatograms based on the peak area at the retention time with the maximum peak height. Peptide intensities were normalized to minimize overall proteome difference based on the assumption that most peptides do not change in intensity between samples. Protein LFQ intensities were calculated from the median of pairwise intensity ratios of peptides identified in two or more samples and adjusted to the cumulative intensity across samples. Quantification was performed using razor and unique peptides, including those modified by acetylation (protein N-terminal) and oxidation (Met). A minimum peptide ratio of 1 was required for protein intensity normalization, and “Fast LFQ” was enabled.
Data processing and cluster analysis was performed using Perseus version 1.5.0.31 (http://www.perseus-framework.org) (28), and statistical analysis was performed using Excel 2013 and 2016 (Microsoft, Redmond, WA). Contaminants and protein groups identified by a single peptide were filtered from the data set. FDR was calculated as the percentage of reverse database matches out of total forward and reverse matches. Protein group LFQ intensities were log2 transformed to reduce the effect of outliers. For cluster analysis and statistical comparisons between proteomes, protein groups missing LFQ values were assigned values using imputation. Missing values were assumed to be biased toward low abundance proteins that were below the MS detection limit, referred to as “missing not at random” (29), an assumption that is frequently made in proteomics studies (28). The missing values were replaced with random values taken from a median downshifted Gaussian distribution to simulate low abundance LFQ values (demonstrated in supplemental Fig. S4). Imputation was performed separately for each sample from a distribution with a width of 0.3 and downshift of 1.8. Hierarchical clustering was performed on Z-score normalized, log2 LFQ intensities using Euclidean distance and average linkage with k-means preprocessing (300 clusters). Log ratios were calculated as the difference in log2 LFQ intensity averages between experimental and control groups. Two-tailed, unpaired, homoscedastic Student's t test calculations were used in statistical tests as histograms of LFQ intensities showed that all data sets approximated normal distributions. p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Base 10-fold-change values for ratios < 1 are represented as negative reciprocals of the ratios.
Data Availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the MassIVE partner repository (http://massive.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/static/massive.jsp) with the data set identifier PXD004570.
Comparison of Proteomics and Microarray Data Sets
Microarray data for OVISE cells with and without ARID1A induction were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus database, accession number GSE54979 (20). Protein groups from the proteomics analysis were mapped to Illumina microarray probes based on Gene Name and Ensembl Gene Accession Number. When duplicate probes were present for a single gene, the probe with the most significant p value was selected.
Canonical Pathway Analysis
Pathway analysis was performed using Qiagen's (Valencia, CA) Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) using default parameters unless otherwise specified (http://www.ingenuity.com/pa/). Tab-delimited files containing matrices of identified proteins and associated log ratios and t test p values were uploaded into the IPA service as “Ingenuity File Format A or B.” Proteins were mapped from UniProt gene names to “IPA IDs” based on “Gene symbol - human.” Unmapped proteins were reconciled based on alternative gene names if possible. Core Analyses were performed using a log ratio threshold of 1 and p value threshold of 0.05. Proteins that increased or decreased in abundance were considered. The entire imported data set for a given comparison was used as a reference set in statistical calculations.

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

