=== TITLE ===
N -Myristoyltransferase Inhibition
Induces ER-Stress, Cell Cycle Arrest, and Apoptosis in Cancer Cells

=== ABSTRACT ===
N -Myristoyltransferase (NMT) covalently attaches
a C14 fatty acid to the N-terminal glycine of proteins and has been
proposed as a therapeutic target in cancer. We have recently shown
that selective NMT inhibition leads to dose-responsive loss of N -myristoylation on more than 100 protein targets in cells,
and cytotoxicity in cancer cells. N -myristoylation
lies upstream of multiple pro-proliferative and oncogenic pathways,
but to date the complex substrate specificity of NMT has limited determination
of which diseases are most likely to respond to a selective NMT inhibitor.
We describe here the phenotype of NMT inhibition in HeLa cells and
show that cells die through apoptosis following or concurrent with
accumulation in the G1 phase. We used quantitative proteomics to map
protein expression changes for more than 2700 proteins in response
to treatment with an NMT inhibitor in HeLa cells and observed down-regulation
of proteins involved in cell cycle regulation and up-regulation of
proteins involved in the endoplasmic reticulum stress and unfolded
protein response, with similar results in breast (MCF-7, MDA-MB-231)
and colon (HCT116) cancer cell lines. This study describes the cellular
response to NMT inhibition at the proteome level and provides a starting
point for selective targeting of specific diseases with NMT inhibitors,
potentially in combination with other targeted agents.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
In-gel fluorescence was recorded using an ETTAN
Dige Imager (GE Healthcare). Chemiluminescence was recorded using
a LAS-3000 Imaging System (Fujifilm). Absorbance in 96-well plates
was measured using a SpectraMax M2/M2e Microplate Reader from Molecular
devices. Culture media and reagents were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich,
Gibco (Life technologies) and A&E Scientific (PAA). For quantitative
proteomics (SILAC), R10K8 and R0K0 DMEM media were purchased from
Dundee cell products, and the cell dissociation buffer (enzyme free,
PBS-based) was obtained from Gibco (Life Technologies). Dialyzed FBS
was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. All buffers were filtered using a
0.2 μM filter to prevent any contamination. MTS assay was performed
as previously described. 3

HeLa, MDA-MB-231, and MCF-7 cells were
grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin.
HCT 116 cells were grown in McCoy’s 5a Medium Modified supplemented
with 0.22 g/L glutamine, 10% FBS, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin.
All cells were grown in a humidified 10% CO 2 -containing
atmosphere at 37 °C. Cells were plated 24 h before treatments.
The number of cells plated for each cell line can be found in the Supporting Information .

Cells were incubated
with inhibitor 1 (0, 1, or 5 μM) for 0–7
days before cell lysis (Western blot analysis), cell fixation (flow
cytometry experiments), or treatment with MTS (cell cytotoxicity assay).
The total amount of DMSO was normalized to the maximum amount of DMSO
used.

After treatment with inhibitor 1 , cells were washed with PBS (3×) and lysed on ice (lysis buffer
for apoptosis samples: PBS 1×, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 1 ×
EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor (Roche Diagnostics), and lysis
buffer for ER stress/UPR samples: 100 mM tris at pH 7.4, 4% SDS, EDTA-free
protease inhibitor). Lysates were kept on ice for 20 min and centrifuged
at 17 000 g for 20 min to remove insoluble
material. Supernatants were collected and stored at −80 °C.
Protein concentration was determined using the Bio-Rad DC Protein
Assay. Proteins were separated on an SDS-PAGE gel and transferred
to PVDF membranes (Millipore, Immobilon-PSQ membrane, pore size 0.2
μM) or nitrocellulose membranes (GE Healthcare, Hybond ECL,
pore size 0.45 μM) using a wet transfer setup and a Tris-glycine
transfer buffer supplemented with 0.1% SDS and 10% MeOH. Membranes
were washed with TBS-T (1 × TBS, 0.1% Tween-20), blocked (5%
dried skimmed milk in TBS-T), washed with TBS-T (3×), and then
incubated with the appropriate primary antibody [BiP (Cell Signaling
Technology, 9956S), Ero1-Lα (Cell Signaling Technology, 9956S),
IRE1α (Cell Signaling Technology, 9956S), PDI (Cell Signaling
Technology, 9956S), PERK (Cell Signaling Technology, 9956S), c-Src
(Cell Signaling Technology, 2123), Tubulin (Santa Cruz, SC53646),
pro-caspase 3 (Cell Signaling Technology SC13156), NMT1 (Atlas Antibodies,
HPA022963), BID (Cell Signaling Technology 2002S), PARP (Santa Cruz,
SC8007), CHOP (Cell Signaling Technology, 2895), Hsp90 (Santa Cruz,
sc-69703), eIF2α (Cell Signaling Technology, 9722), phosphor-eIF2α
(Cell Signaling Technology, 9721), or ATF4 (Proteintech, 10835-1-AP)]
in blocking solution overnight, washed with TBS-T (4×, 10 min),
incubated with the appropriate secondary antibodies in blocking solution
for 1 h (mouse: HRP goat anti mouse, 1/20 000, BD Pharmingen, cat.
no. 554002; rabbit: HRP goat anti rabbit, 1/5000, Invitrogen, cat.
no. G-21234) washed with TBS-T (4×, 10 min) and developed with
Luminata Crescendo Western HRP substrate (Millipore) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions and on a Fujifilm LAS 3000
imager.

After treatment with inhibitor 1 or DMSO, both adherent and floating cells were harvested
and washed with PBS (2 × 1 mL). Cell pellets were resuspended
in 70% EtOH and fixed overnight at 4 °C or for several days at
−20 °C. Fixed cells were washed with PBS (2 × 1 mL).
Cell pellets were resuspended in PI solution (200 μL, 50 μg/mL)
and transferred to a 5 mL tube for flow cytometry analysis. A total
of 10 μL of RNase was added to each tube. Samples were quickly
vortexed and incubated at RT in the dark prior to analysis. Samples
were processed using a BD LSRFortessa cell analyzer (BD Biosciences,
UK). The distribution of cells in each phase of the cell cycle was
calculated using FlowJo 7.6.5 software.

Dead and apoptotic cells were
detected using an FITC Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit I (BD Pharmingen)
and the protocol described by the supplier with some modifications.

After treatment with the inhibitor or DMSO, both adherent and floating
cells were harvested and washed with PBS (2 × 1 mL). Cell pellets
were resuspended in 200 μL of 1× binding buffer (1 ×
10 6 cells/mL). A total of 100 μL of the solution
were transferred to a 5 mL tube. A total of 5 μL of FITC Annexin
V and 5 μL PI were added. The samples were vortexed and incubated
for 15 min at RT in the dark. A total of 400 μL of 1× binding
buffer was added to each tube prior to analysis by flow cytometry.
Samples were analyzed within 1 h following PI and Annexin V addition.
Samples were processed using a BD LSRFortessa cell analyzer (BD Biosciences,
UK). Samples were compensated automatically using untreated cells
and unstained, apoptotic cells (1 μM STS treatment for 6 h)
stained with Annexin V and dead cells (10 μM treated cells for
7 days) stained with PI.

The distribution of apoptotic, dead,
and alive cells was calculated
using FlowJo 7.6.5 software.

Cells were treated
with BrdU (10 mM,
GE Healthcare) for 30 min before the end of the experiment. Both adherent
and floating cells were harvested and washed with PBS (1 × 1
mL). Cell pellets were resuspended in 70% EtOH and fixed overnight
at 4 °C or for several days at −20 °C. Fixed cells
were washed with PBS (1 × 1 mL) and collected by centrifugation.
Cells were resuspended in 2 M HCl/0.5% (v/v) Triton X-100 and incubated
at RT for 30 min.

Cells were collected by centrifugation, washed
in 1 mL of neutralizing solution (0.1 M Tris at pH 8.5), and collected
once more before addition of 1 mL of blocking solution (1% (w/v) BSA/0.5%
(v/v) Tween 20 in PBS). A total of 10 6 cells were transferred
to a Falcon tube and collected by centrifugation. Cells were resuspended
directly in a solution of the FITC-conjugated anti-BrdU antibody (347583,
BD Biosciences, 1 μL) in blocking solution (1% (w/v) BSA/0.5%
(v/v) Tween 20 in PBS, 19 μL) and incubated at RT in the dark
for 30 min. Cells were then washed with blocking solution and collected
by centrifugation. Cell pellets were resuspended in PI solution (200
μL, 50 μg/mL) and transferred to a 5 mL tube for flow
cytometry analysis. A total of 10 μL of RNase was added to each
tube. Samples were incubated at RT in the dark prior to analysis.
FITC-fluorescence against PI fluorescence using the FlowJo 7.6.5 software.
BrdU positive cells were scored as the population of cells with FITC-fluorescence
higher than that of the G1 or G2/M population

Following treatment
with inhibitor 1 for 0, 1, 2, or 3 days (5 μM),
adherent and floating cells were lysed in 100 mM Tris at pH 7.4, 4%
SDS, 0.1 M DTT EDTA-free protease inhibitor. Protein concentration
was determined, and the samples were spiked-in with a heavy spike-in
standard prepared by lysing heavy HeLa cells in the same lysis buffer.
The samples and spike-in standard were mixed in a 1:1 ratio. Samples
were digested according to a Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP)
protocol, which was performed using a 5 kDa molecular weight cutoff
filter (EMD Millipore), according to Sharma et al. ( 26 ) with modifications. Briefly, 30 μL
of each sample (60 μg of lysate) was mixed with 200 μL
of 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5; urea buffer) in the spin filter
and centrifuged at 14 000 g for 15 min at 20
°C to remove SDS. The centrifugation steps were repeated if the
volume left in the filter exceeded 50 μL. The proteins were
washed with 200 μL of urea buffer to exchange any remaining
SDS by urea. The proteins were alkylated with 100 μL of 50 mM
iodoacetamide for 20 min at RT in the dark. The proteins were washed
with urea buffer (2 × 100 μL) and with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate
(pH 8.0; 5 × 200 μL). A total of 1 μg of trypsin
in 100 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) was added to
the proteins in the spin filter, and proteins were digested with trypsin
overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation by
the addition of 40 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0)
and of 50 μL of 0.5 M NaCl. Where indicated, samples were fractionated
to increase the number of identified proteins according to a published
protocol. 34 Samples were acidified with
TFA (1% (v/v) TFA) and loaded on the sorbent and washed with 0.2%
(v/v) TFA in Milli-Q water (2 × 60 μL) to desalt the sample.
Elution occurred from the sorbent (SDB-RPS from 3M) with 60 μL
of 100 mM ammonium formate, 40% (v/v) ACN, and 0.5% (v/v) formic acid
to give “fraction 1,” with 60 μL of 5% (v/v) ammonium
hydroxide and 80% (v/v) ACN to yield “fraction 2,” followed
by elution with 60 μL 5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide and 80% (v/v)
ACN to give “fraction 3.” Fractions were concentrated
and peptides dissolved in 0.5% TFA and 2% acetonitrile in water before
being transferred into LC-MS sample vials. Nonfractionated samples
were desalted prior to LC-MS/MS analysis according to a published
protocol. 57 Elution from the sorbent (SDC-XC
from 3M) with 70% acetonitrile in water was followed by speed-vac-assisted
solvent removal, reconstitution of peptides in 0.5% TFA, and 2% acetonitrile
in water and transferred into LC-MS sample vials.

The analysis was performed as previously
described 3 using an Acclaim PepMap RSLC
column (50 cm × 75 μm inner-diameter; Thermo Fisher Scientific)
using a 2 h acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a
flow rate of 250 nL min –1 . Easy nLC-1000 was coupled
to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer via an easy-spray
source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive was operated
in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution
of 75 000 at m / z 200 (transient
time 256 ms). Up to 10 of the most abundant isotope patterns with
a charge of +2 or higher from the survey scan were selected with an
isolation window of 3.0 m / z and
fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized
collision energies of 25. The maximum ion injection times for the
survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 17 500
at m / z 200) were 20 and 120 ms,
respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 106 and for MS/MS
to 105, and the intensity threshold was set to 8.3 × 102.

The data were processed with
MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5, 58 and the peptides
were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the human
Swissprot+Isoforms database (July 2013) using the Andromeda search
engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification
and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Up to two missed
cleavages were allowed. “Unique and razor peptides”
mode was selected. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins,
and sites. Other parameters were used as preset in the software. Data
were analyzed using Microsoft Office Excel 2007 and Perseus version
1.3.0.4.

The experiment
comprised three biological replicates for each sample (0 day treatment,
1 day treatment, 2 day treatment, 3 day treatment). The replicates
were grouped together. Ratios of light/heavy (L/H, corresponding to
the amount of protein in the lysate treated with the inhibitor for
0–3 days/amount of protein in the spike-in standard) found
for each protein, each condition, and each replicate (three biological
replicates) were determined by MaxQuant as explained above. The data
were filtered to require at least two valid values in the “0
day treatment” protein group. Ratios were logarithmized (base
2). L/H ratios were normalized to the median value in each replicate.
An ANOVA test was performed to detect significant changes between
the four time points (permutation based FDR statistics were applied
(250 permutation, FDR < 0.05, 2 tailed, s0 = 1). The data were
filtered to keep only proteins which were significantly up/down regulated
based on the ANOVA test. The data were further filtered by keeping
only the proteins with a Log2 fold change higher than 1 (“up-regulated”
proteins) or lower than −1 (“down-regulated”
proteins) after 3 days (for protein with no valid value in the 3 day
samples, the data were manually inspected, and protein with a Log2
fold change higher than 1 (or lower than −1) after 2 days was
added to the list of significant proteins). To get the Log2 fold change
after 1 day treatment, 2 day treatment, and 3 day treatment, the Log2
mean of L/H ratios for “0 day treatment” was subtracted
from the mean of L/H ratios of the 1 day treatment, 2 day treatment,
and 3 day treatment, respectively.

For the fractionated
samples (three fractions/replicate, three biological replicate for
each sample (0 day treatment and 3 day treatment), 18 LC-MS runs in
total), fractions of a same biological replicate were combined using
the “set fractions” function in MaxQuant. The data were
filtered to require at least one valid value. The replicates were
grouped together. Ratios of light/heavy (L/H, corresponding to amount
of protein in the lysate treated with the inhibitor for 0–3
days/amount of protein in the spike-in standard) found for each protein,
each condition, and each replicate (three biological replicates) were
determined by MaxQuant as explained above. L/H ratios were normalized
to the median value in each sample. A modified t test
with permutation based FDR statistics was applied (“two-sample
test,” FDR of 0.02, s0 = 1) between the two groups. Protein
interaction networks were generated with STRING 9.1 59 and visualized with Cytoscape 3.2.0. 60 Biological processes were analyzed with ClueGo 2.1.5. 61

cb6b00371_si_002.xlsx

cb6b00371_si_003.xlsx

cb6b00371_si_004.xlsx

=== RESULTS ===
We sought to investigate
the response of cancer cells to compound 1 in more detail
to aid understanding of the mechanism of
action of this selective NMT inhibitor. The effect of NMT inhibition
on cell proliferation and apoptosis was evaluated in HeLa cells treated
with various concentrations of inhibitor 1 or with vehicle
(DMSO) for 1, 3, or 7 days. 0.2 μM inhibitor 1 corresponds
to the EC 50 value measured by a standard metabolic activity
(MTS) assay. 3 As demonstrated by previous
tagging analyses, 0.2 μM and 1 μM inhibitor correspond
to concentrations sufficient to inhibit 50% and 90% NMT activity in
HeLa cells, while treatment with 5 μM or 10 μM results
in undetectable NMT activity in cells. 3 Complete NMT inhibition results in the previously observed plateau
of residual metabolic activity in an MTS assay after 3 days ( Supporting Information Figure 1 ). After 1 day,
samples treated with 1, 5, or 10 μM inhibitor displayed a significant
G1 accumulation ( p < 0.01; Figure 1 B and C). After 3 days, a substantial proportion
of cells treated with 1 μM or greater inhibitor concentration
were sub-G1 (dead/apoptotic), with the remainder mainly arrested in
the G1 phase. Following 7 days of inhibition, cells were mostly dead/apoptotic
(sub-G1) in samples treated with >1 μM of inhibitor, whereas
ca. 40% of cells treated with 0.2 μM inhibitor were dead after
7 days, consistent with the MTS assay ( Supporting
Information Figure 1 ). These findings suggest that upon NMT
inhibition cells undergo G1 arrest followed by cell death. Selective
NMT inhibition is characterized by a progressive onset of cytotoxicity,
and we hypothesized that this is due to the time required to turn
over existing N -myristoylated proteins in cells,
concurrent with evolution of the proteome toward a predominance of
nonmyristoylated NMT substrates. To confirm the observed cell cycle
arrest phenotype, cells were stained with BrdU/PI and analyzed by
flow cytometry ( Figure 1 D and Supporting Information Figure 2 ).
BrdU staining after 1- and 3-day treatments with inhibitor 1 indicated a substantial decrease in DNA synthesis, confirming that
cells arrested.

To investigate the mode of cell death, markers of apoptosis
were analyzed by Western blot in HeLa cells treated for 1, 3, or 7
days with inhibitor 1 ( Figure 2 A). Staurosporine (STS), a nonspecific kinase
inhibitor known to induce apoptosis, 28 was
used as a positive control for apoptosis, and HsNMT1, which was previously
shown to be cleaved during apoptosis, 29 was also assessed. Markers of apoptosis did not change after 1 day
of inhibition in agreement with cell cytotoxicity 3 and cell cycle analyses ( Figure 1 C). However, at 3 days treatment, PARP, BID,
Caspase 3, and HsNMT1 were all cleaved to a substantial extent. After
7 days of inhibition, it proved difficult to detect full length or
cleaved PARP, HsNMT1, and Caspase 3, probably because of complete
degradation. These results suggested that HeLa cells were dying at
least in part through apoptosis.

Prolonged NMT inhibition induces apoptosis
in HeLa cells. (A) Western
blot analysis of apoptotic markers in HeLa cells treated for 0, 1,
3, or 7 days with 5 μM inhibitor 1 . Cells were
treated with staurosporine (STS) (1 μM) for 4 h as a control
for apoptosis. (B) Flow cytometry analyses of cells treated with Annexin
V and PI following treatment with inhibitor 1 .

An annexin V-FITC/PI dual staining
assay was used to confirm whether
inhibitor 1 could induce apoptosis in HeLa cells ( Figure 2 B and Supporting Information Figure 3 ). Treatment with
inhibitor 1 showed that annexin-V-positive cells increased
in a time-dependent manner in response to NMT inhibition. Early apoptotic
cells appeared after 24 h treatment, consistent with relocation of
phosphatidylserine being a relatively early event in the apoptotic
cascade. There was a substantial population of dead cells observed
after 3 days of treatment, and all cells stained positive for annexin
V after 7 days of treatment, consistent with cell cycle analysis ( Figure 1 C) and MTS assay.
Thus, taken together, data in Figure 2 suggest that cells die in response to NMT inhibition
through apoptosis.

A potentially important NMT substrate for
the mode of action of
cytotoxicity is the proto-oncogene c-Src, which is a validated target
for cancer therapy. 30 Src family kinase
inhibitors, such as dasatinib, can induce apoptosis and a G1 arrest
as observed in the context of NMT inhibition, while high levels of
c-Src tyrosine kinase activity have been associated with cancer progression,
where they promote cell survival, proliferation, and metastasis. 31 N -myristoylation is required
for the autophosphorylation of c-Src and, as a consequence, for its
tyrosine kinase activity. 21 Upon NMT inhibition,
we observed a decrease of phosphorylated c-Src after 1 day and 3 days,
suggesting that c-Src had a reduced protein kinase activity, while
levels of total c-Src remained constant ( Supporting
Information Figure S4 ). However, while c-Src is an interesting
downstream target, we have previously shown that NMT has over 100
protein substrates in mammalian cells, and it is thus reasonable to
suppose that additional proteins and pathways will be linked to the
mode of action of NMT inhibition.

We next sought to determine the progressive
effects of NMT inhibition on key pathways in cells through whole proteome
analysis. NMT inhibition induces negligible toxicity at 1 day, and
we hypothesized that early mechanism-related changes in protein abundance
might occur by 2 days, while after 3 days proteins affected by the
inhibitor would reflect cell death pathways. We have previously shown
that after 1-day treatment with inhibitor 1 , 3 the abundance of the large majority of proteins
is not significantly affected. We thus performed a quantitative analysis
of the proteome following treatment of HeLa cells with 1 (5 μM) for 0, 1, 2, and 3 days using a Spike-in SILAC approach, 32 which allows quantitative comparison between
multiple biological samples ( n = 3 biological replicates)
without restricting conditions for the experiment to media specific
for isotopic labeling ( Supporting Information
Table 1 ). HeLa cells grown in standard DMEM media were treated
with the inhibitor for 0–3 days and after lysis samples were
spiked with lysate obtained from HeLa cells grown in media containing
heavy Lys and Arg. Tryptic digestion of the samples using filter-assisted
sample preparation (FASP) 33 enabled quantification
of proteome-wide changes in protein abundance, determined in 3-fold
replicate experiments at each of the four time points of inhibitor
treatment on a high resolution nanoLC-MS/MS platform. A total of 1160
proteins were quantified in at least two replicates at each of the
time points ( Supporting Information Table 1 and
Figure S5 ), with L/H ratios normalized to the median value
in each sample. Proteins with a fold-change ratio of at least 2 (ANOVA-test,
FDR < 0.05) after 3-day treatment compared to no treatment (0 day)
are presented in Figure 3 A. Twenty proteins were significantly down-regulated, while 37 proteins
were up-regulated in response to NMT inhibition. Interestingly, the
same groups of proteins were consistently and progressively down-
or up-regulated over the course of the experiment, suggesting a consistent
mechanism operating over time; these changes were strongest at 3 days,
suggesting that the later time-point is most suitable to identify
significantly affected proteins.

Quantitative proteomics and pathway analyses
of NMT inhibited HeLa
cells. (A) Dynamic profile of significantly altered protein levels.
Cells were treated with DMSO control or inhibitor 1 (5
μM for 1, 2, or 3 days), and >1100 proteins were quantified
across the four samples ( n = 3 biological replicates). 3 Proteins for which abundance is significantly
affected after 3 days of treatment and with a Log2 fold change >1
are shown (ANOVA, FDR < 0.05, s0 = 1). Red indicates significantly
down-regulated proteins and blue significantly up-regulated proteins.
(B) Volcano plot of log2 ratios representing log2 fold change of 3-day
treatment to control, with lysate fractionation to increase proteome
coverage (>3000 proteins quantified, n = 3 biological
replicates). Dashed lines represent t test significance
cutoff (Benjamini–Hochberg FDR 0.02, s0 of 1). A total of 398
proteins are differentially expressed at 3 days. Red indicates significantly
down-regulated proteins. Blue shows significantly up-regulated proteins,
and gray represents all other proteins. (C) GO annotations (biological
process and cellular compartment) of proteins significantly up- and
down-regulated after 3-day treatment, obtained from ClueGO and Cytoscape.
The term p-value and the percentage of associated genes are indicated.

In order to obtain deeper protein
quantification at 3 days, proteins
were subjected to FASP and tryptic peptides fractionated by pipet-based
strong anion exchange chromatography 34 prior
to analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS. Three biological replicates were analyzed
in 3 fractions for each time point (0 and 3 day treatment), leading
to 18 data sets with excellent reproducibility between replicates
(Pearson coefficient 0.816 to 0.921, Supporting
Information Figure S6 ). More than 3500 proteins were identified,
and 2749 proteins were accurately quantified in at least two replicates
of both samples ( Supporting Information Figure
S6 and Table 2 ). The H/L ratio was normalized to the median
over biological replicates, and the resultant quantitative distribution
of relative protein abundance exhibited a broad spectrum of dynamics
from −2.6 to +2.6 log2 fold change. In total, 398 differentially
expressed proteins were identified with >1.5-fold change ( t test significant, FDR = 0.02, s0 = 1) in the treated sample
compared to control ( Figure 3 B), with 162 significantly down-regulated and 236 significantly
up-regulated by NMT inhibition.

A combination
of approaches was deployed to understand the biological functions
most affected by NMT inhibition across the 398 differentially expressed
proteins. The Cytoscape ClueGo plug-in ( Figure 3 C, Supporting Information
Figure S7–S9 and Table 3 ) allowed functional grouping
and visualization of nonredundant biological terms across the network,
while analysis of the network using STRING enabled the main clusters
of proteins to be obtained ( Figure 4 ). NMT inhibition most significantly ( p < 10 –4 ) down-regulated chromosome organization/condensation
processes, consistent with cell cycle arrest, and mitochondrial electron
transport ( Figure 3 C). The most significantly ( p < 10 –10 ) up-regulated biological processes encompassed Golgi vesicle transport
and the response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and carboxylic
acid metabolism. In particular, proteins involved in activation of
the unfolded protein response, protein N -glycosylation,
and the ER-nucleus signaling pathway were strongly induced, including
ER chaperone BiP, 35 which plays a central
role in the folding and assembly of proteins, degradation of misfolded
proteins, and preservation of ER homeostasis. A number of known BiP
interacting proteins were also up-regulated, including other chaperones
(GRP170/HYOU1) or cochaperones (DNAJC10), together with proteins involved
in protein quality control (e.g., Calreticulin). Interestingly, the
four other most significantly up-regulated biological processes are
closely related to ER-stress. Notably, either activation of N-glycolysation
by addition of N-glycan precursor N-acetylglucosamine or gain of function
of GFAT/GFPT1 (which was overexpressed in the present study) were
recently shown to activate the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway
and act as a protective mechanism by activating the clearance of misfolded
proteins. 36

Proteome-wide expression
changes upon NMT inhibition for 3 days
in HeLa cells. Network analysis was performed with STRING and biological
processes analyzed with ClueGo+. The interaction network was visualized
with Cytoscape, and the most significantly enriched biological process
clusters are indicated. (A) Network of up-regulated proteins. (B)
Network of down-regulated proteins.

NMT inhibition also resulted in significant up-regulation
of proteins
involved in incorporation of amino acids during protein translation,
including aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, amino acid transporters and
proteins involved in the machinery of protein synthesis, such as tryptophan—tRNA
ligase, cytoplasmic (WARS), serine—tRNA ligase, cytoplasmic
(SARS), or bifunctional glutamate/proline-tRNA ligase (EPRS). This
is consistent with induction of ER-stress, which has recently been
shown to result in an increase in translation, and a potential mechanism
for cell death. 37 , 38 Interestingly, we discovered
significant up-regulation of five t-RNA ligase proteins, IARS, EPRS,
GARS, AARS, and WARS, as well as seven proteins involved in the unfolded
protein response, SEC31A, HSPA5, SRPR, AARS, GFPT1, HYOU1, and ASNS.
To confirm induction of ER-stress following NMT inhibition, we analyzed
cell lysates from HeLa cells treated with inhibitor 1 for 0, 1, 3, and 7 days by Western blot ( Figure 5 ) and found that key markers of ER-stress,
including BiP, Ero1-Lα, IRE1α, PDI-1, and PERK were relatively
up-regulated in this cell line following NMT inhibition. Furthermore,
CHOP, the pro-apoptotic transcription factor of the unfolded protein
response (UPR), and proteins upstream of CHOP in the pro-apoptotic
pathway of the UPR (PERK, eIF2α and ATF4) were also up-regulated
( Figure 5 ), strongly
suggesting that the UPR pathway contributes to activation of apoptosis.

NMT inhibition
induces ER stress in HeLa cells. Western blot analyses
of markers of ER stress and unfolded protein response; HeLa were treated
with inhibitor 1 (5 μM) for 0, 1, 3, or 7 days.
Hsp90 was used as a loading control. Data are representative of at
least three biological replicates.

NMT inhibition also appears to impact pathways relevant to
ER to
Golgi trafficking, a critical process involved in the sorting of properly
folded, processed, and assembled proteins from unfolded or immature
proteins, and from ER-resident proteins. 39 SEC23, SEC24, SEC13 and SEC31, SAR1a, and the components of COPII,
which are associated with ER to the Golgi transport vesicles, are
all up-regulated upon treatment with inhibitor 1 , as
are COPII-associated proteins such as SLY1 (SCFD1) and melanoma inhibitory
activity protein 3 (MIA3). 40 , 41

As the proteome and myristoylated proteome of HeLa
cells have been previously well-characterized, we initially employed
this cell line to probe the mode of action of inhibitor 1 . In order to test the scope of this finding, MTS assays and cell
cycle analyses were carried out for 1 in three additional
cancer cell lines: MDA-MB-231 (breast cancer), HCT-116 (colon), and
MCF-7 (breast; Supporting Information Figure 10A ). The time-dependent response with residual metabolic activity characteristic
of on-target NMT inhibition was found to be strongly conserved between
these lines, suggesting a conserved mode of action through NMT inhibition.
However, MDA-MB-231 and HCT-116 were not as sensitive to 3-day NMT
inhibition, showing residual metabolic activities of 51% and 73%,
respectively. MCF-7 also had a different pattern with a somewhat lower
EC 50 and a plateau of metabolic activity at 64%. Following
prolonged NMT inhibition (7 days), treatment with 10 μM of inhibitor 1 resulted in cell death for all of these lines. In line with
a conserved mode of action, all ER-stress markers previously probed
in HeLa were also progressively up-regulated in all three cell lines,
following NMT inhibition over 1, 3, and 7 days ( Supporting Information Figure 10E ).

Similarly to HeLa
cells, MDA-MB-231, HCT-116, and MCF-7 underwent G1 accumulation after
1–2 days ( Supporting Information Figure
10B–D ). An increase in the number of subG0/G1 cells
was also observed after 3 days for MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells but
not for HCT-116, suggesting that these cells might be less sensitive
to NMT inhibition. NMT inhibition also induced apoptosis in MDA-MB-231,
MCF-7, and HCT-116 cells; however, induction was slower in HCT-116,
in agreement with the small sub G0/G1 population observed in cell
cycle analysis ( Supporting Information Figure
10C ). These variations in sensitivity between lines may result
from differential NMT substrate expression or NMT enzyme activity,
the particular importance of specific NMT substrates in a given cell
line, or differences in susceptibility to downstream cell death pathways
(e.g., apoptosis).

=== CONCLUSION ===
In the present study,
in-depth quantitative proteomics analysis
was used to characterize the proteome-wide cellular response to NMT
inhibition, identifying 398 significantly differentially expressed
proteins. These changes were distributed across multiple important
processes, with a substantial proportion converging on pathways related
to cell cycle regulation and ER stress. The inhibitor used in the
present study has been shown to be a selective pharmacological tool
for inhibition of NMT activity in human cells. 3 Although we cannot categorically exclude a contribution from other
targets, time-dependent cytotoxicity as well as a strong correlation
between dose-dependent tagging of NMT substrate with YnMyr and dose-dependent
cytotoxicity in HeLa are highly consistent with on-target and selective
NMT inhibition in mammalian cells. 3

ER-stress is a mechanism employed by cells to restore normal function
of the ER following accumulation of misfolded proteins. Initially,
proteins involved in protein folding or degradation (the unfolded
protein response (UPR) pathway) are up-regulated, concurrent with
an attenuation of translation of protein involved in the cell cycle
and a G1 arrest, 42 in close agreement with
observations made in the present study. During ER-stress, misfolded
proteins are degraded in the ER associated degradation (ERAD) pathway
by the proteasome, or alternatively by autophagy, which can act as
a protective mechanism by helping cells to cope with ER-stress. 43 Several proteins involved in autophagy were
up-regulated in the present study, including CTSD, GABARAPL2, LAMP1,
MAP1LC3A, MAP1LC3B, MAP1LC3B2, RAB1A, and SQSTM1. If ER homeostasis
is not restored, prolonged ER-stress will result in apoptosis and/or
autophagy, and cell death, 44 and we observed
that selective inhibition of NMT in HeLa cells resulted in progressive
induction of ER stress and eventual cell death, at least in part through
apoptosis. Interestingly, induction of ER-stress by tunicamycin, an
N-glycosylation inhibitor widely employed to promote ER-stress, resulted
in a comparable phenotype in neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells, with up-regulation
of ER chaperones (BiP), aminoacyl-tRNA synthases, and proteins involved
in protein transport, as well as induction of apoptosis. 45 NMT inhibition appeared to have a similar phenotype
(G1 accumulation, increasing cell death over time, ER-stress) in a
range of cancer cell lines, albeit with variations in sensitivity
( Supporting Information Figure S10 ).

With more than 70 different proteins proven to be cotranslationally
myristoylated by NMTs in HeLa cells, NMT inhibition is likely to affect
multiple pathways, several of which could potentially trigger ER-stress.
Notably, ADP-ribosylation factors (ARFs) are N -myristoylated
small GTPases essential for COPI vesicle formation in retrograde protein
transport from Golgi to ER. 46 N -myristoylation of ARF1 is required for binding to phospholipid membranes
and activation by guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) that
promote the exchange of GDP for GTP. 46 , 47 Inhibition
of Golgi-specific Brefeldin A resistance factor 1 (GBF1), the ARF
guanine nucleotide-exchange factor (GEF), by Brefeldin A prevents
ARF activation and COPI recruitment to membranes, resulting in accumulation
of proteins in the ER, ER-stress, and finally apoptosis. 46 , 48 Interestingly, GBF1 is also up-regulated in the present study, consistent
with its recently reported role in responding to reduced ARF activity. 49 Taken together, these data suggest that ARFs
merit future investigation as potentially important NMT substrates
for the cytotoxic mode of action of NMT inhibitors. Arf1-targeted
agents have recently been reported with potent in vivo anticancer activity, 50 and NMT inhibition
is likely to result in a mechanistically distinct but functionally
similar outcome by preventing Arf1 localization at the Golgi.

One of the 26S regulatory proteasome subunits (PSMC1) and four
E3 ubiquitin ligases involved in the proteasome degradation pathway
(MGRN1, RNF125, ZNRF1, and ZNRF2) are N -myristoylated,
and ER-stress may also be enhanced following malfunction of the proteasome
machinery. Indeed, Bortezomib A, a 26S proteasome inhibitor, is known
to induce ER-stress by overloading the ERAD pathway with misfolded
proteins. 43 During ER-stress, degradation
of misfolded proteins by the proteasome (ERAD pathway) also allows
recycling of essential amino acids in cells, and it was recently shown
that proteasome inhibition can lead to cell death through the failure
of amino acid homeostasis. 51 In this context,
it is particularly interesting that starvation response processes
were highly enriched ( p < 10 –4 ) upon NMT inhibition.

It is also conceivable that NMT inhibition
could result in accumulation
of excess free myristic acid as a result of lowered flux through the N -myristoylation pathway. Although longer chain fatty acids
have been observed to enhance ER-stress, 52 this mechanism seems unlikely to contribute to the mode of action
in cells since introduction of excess myristic acid is minimally cytotoxic
in comparison to longer chain fatty acids. 53

The present study provides a resource to guide
future targeting
of specific diseases with NMT inhibitors and a preliminary study of
the pathways affected by an NMT inhibitor as a single agent in cancer
cells. While most of the pathways highlighted in our whole proteome
analysis may be important for phenotypes other than cytotoxicity,
we have shown that NMT inhibition kills HeLa cells at least in part
through the ER stress and UPR pathways.

ER stress has been shown
to be chronically activated in many tumors,
where it allows tumor cells to proliferate and survive under extreme
conditions such as hypoxia and protects them from chemotherapy. 54 Pharmacological ER stress can impose an additional
burden on this pro-survival pathway, activating pro-apoptotic pathways
and cell death. Several drugs promoting ER-stress have already entered
the clinic, or are in clinical trials, such as Bortezomib A or Brefeldin
A, discussed above. 55 However, these compounds
can either increase sensitivity or resistance to anticancer therapies,
depending on the inhibitor and the cancer cell line. 56 As both the proteasome and autophagy are important in the
response to ER-stress to degrade unfolded proteins, it has been suggested
that it might be beneficial to modulate these pathways simultaneously, 56 and NMT inhibitors offer a novel combination
of ER-stress promoting mechanisms. In future studies it will be interesting
to test the hypothesis that cell lines dependent on chronic ER-stress
to survive will be particularly sensitive to NMT inhibition as a single
agent, subject to cell-line-specific susceptibility to apoptosis.
In contrast, normal and slowly proliferating cells that lack pre-existing
ER stress could be less susceptible.

Taken together, the data
presented here suggest that NMT inhibition
progressively induces a unique and specific cell state through alteration
of pathways connected to its 100+ substrate proteins. We have highlighted
some of the most prominent pathways affected following extended inhibitor
exposure, but it is also clear that the influence of NMT inhibition
is remarkably subtle, with only 14% of the proteome significantly
modulated after 3 days. We suggest that two complementary approaches
could be used in the future to unlock the potential of NMT inhibitors
for oncology indications: (1) wider screening of cancer cell line
panels to uncover unanticipated sensitivities for specific cancer
subtypes and (2) comparative proteomic analysis of NMT substrate profiles
and proteome changes in contrasting or drug-resistant cell lines,
to reveal sensitivity or resistance mechanisms. We anticipate that
deeper system level analysis of these data sets will lead not only
to novel indications for human NMT inhibitors as single agents but
also to identification of drug synergies that exploit the altered
signaling network induced by NMT inhibition to reverse resistance,
improve efficacy, or extend the therapeutic index for agents already
in the clinic.
