=== TITLE ===
Lapatinib Resistance in Breast Cancer Cells Is Accompanied by Phosphorylation-Mediated Reprogramming of Glycolysis

=== ABSTRACT ===
HER2/ERBB2–overexpressing breast cancers targeted effectively by the small-molecule kinase inhibitor lapatinib frequently acquire resistance to this drug. In this study, we employed explorative mass spectrometry to profile proteome, kinome, and phosphoproteome changes in an established model of lapatinib resistance to systematically investigate initial inhibitor response and subsequent reprogramming in resistance. The resulting dataset, which collectively contains quantitative data for >7,800 proteins, >300 protein kinases, and >15,000 phosphopeptides, enabled deep insight into signaling recovery and molecular reprogramming upon resistance. Our data-driven approach confirmed previously described mechanisms of resistance (e.g., AXL overexpression and PIK3 reactivation), revealed novel pharmacologically actionable targets, and confirmed the expectation of significant heterogeneity in molecular resistance drivers inducing distinct phenotypic changes. Furthermore, our approach identified an extensive and exclusively phosphorylation-mediated reprogramming of glycolytic activity, supported additionally by widespread changes of corresponding metabolites and an increased sensitivity towards glycolysis inhibition. Collectively, our multi-omic analysis offers deeper perspectives on cancer drug resistance and suggests new biomarkers and treatment options for lapatinib-resistant cancers. Cancer Res; 77(8); 1842–53. ©2017 AACR.

=== INTRODUCTION ===
The receptor tyrosine kinase ERBB2 is overexpressed in 20%–30% of all breast tumors and leads to an increase in the proliferative and invasive potential, which is associated with poor prognosis for patient survival (1). Mechanistically, high levels of ERBB2 cause homodimerization or heterodimerization with other ERBB family members, subsequent autophosphorylation and activation of downstream signaling pathways even in the absence of an activating ligand (2). Pharmacologic efforts directed against ERBB2 activity resulted in the FDA approval of, for example, trastuzumab (3), a mAb that prevents ERBB2 dimerization, and lapatinib (4), a small-molecule EGFR/ERBB2 inhibitor that blocks the kinases’ active site. However, despite initially high response rates, breast tumors frequently acquire resistance against targeted therapy. Owing to the early FDA approval of ERBB2-targeted therapies and their clinical prevalence in breast cancer, a wealth of different resistance mechanisms has been described to date.

For example, Liu and colleagues found the overexpression of the receptor tyrosine kinase AXL to be driving lapatinib resistance in the ERBB2-overexpressing breast cancer cell line BT-474 (5). They showed that AXL engaged PIK3, which in turn restored proliferation by recovery of the AKT/MTOR signaling branch. Other examples include signaling switches to other receptor tyrosine kinases [RTKs; EGFR (6), ERBB3 (7), ERBB4 (8), EPHA2 (9), IGF1R (10, 11), MET (12), or MERTK (13), the activation of downstream kinases PRKACA (14), SRC (15–17) or PIK3CA (18) and non-kinase mediated mechanisms (e.g., loss of CDKN1B (19) or increased ESR1 signaling (20)].

Metabolic alterations provide another mechanism by which cancer cells can evade the selective pressure of inhibitor treatment. Overexpression of LDHA (21) as well as increased expression of the glucose deprivation response network (22) are described mechanisms in lapatinib-resistant breast cancer. In addition, two independent studies recently found that small-molecule inhibitor resistance can be mediated by the estrogen-related receptor alpha (ESRRA), which is capable of altering metabolism through transcriptional regulation induced by oncogenic signaling changes (23, 24). Deblois and colleagues showed that MTOR-dependent ESRRA reexpression contributes to lapatinib resistance via increased glutamine metabolism and Park and colleagues provided evidence for intrinsic resistance of breast cancer cells to PIK3/MTOR inhibition, which is caused by alteration of mitochondrial function and lactate metabolism. Both studies reveal a tight orchestration of kinase signaling, protein expression changes, and metabolic adaption, which clearly highlights the importance of a systems-level understanding of resistance and furthermore suggests the existence of several parallel and targetable alterations, which are codependent.

Mass spectrometry–based technologies nowadays allow for the explorative and large-scale assessment of (phospho)proteins and metabolites, thus rendering the study of such complex associations feasible. Here, we used an established, lapatinib-resistant BT-474 cell line model (5) and applied a combination of proteomics, chemoproteomics, phosphoproteomics, and metabolomics in an effort to globally assess the molecular consequences of lapatinib treatment and resistance. Collectively, our analysis offers a systems-wide view on the molecular mechanisms of resistance and shows that the acquisition is accompanied by many pharmacologically exploitable alterations. Specifically, the data suggest that posttranslational regulation of glycolysis leads to increased metabolic dependence on glucose consumption (glycolytic addiction) in lapatinib resistance. In combination with results from other studies, this observation implies that increased glucose addiction in resistance can occur via multiple different routes. Hence, this phenotype might represent a common and targetable convergence point and, as such, a universal “Achilles’ heel” of resistance to ERBB2-targeted therapies in breast cancer.

=== METHODS ===
Cell culture and reagents
Parental BT-474 cells and its lapatinib resistant clone BT-474-J4 were received from the Department of Translational Research, GlaxoSmithKline and were grown in DMEM/Ham F-12 medium (Biochrom) supplemented with 15% (v/v) FBS (Biochrom) and 1% (v/v) antibiotic/antimycotic solution (Sigma). The cell line identity of BT-474 cells was confirmed to be 100% by SNP profiling and comparison with a reference database. Resistant BT-474-J4 cells were cultured in the continuous presence of 1 μmol/L lapatinib. Both cell lines were regularly tested for Mycoplasma infection. Biological replicates were prepared at different days using a different cell line passage. Lapatinib, dasatinib, and bosutinib were purchased from LC Laboratories, 2-deoxy-d-glucose was purchased from Sigma Aldrich and saracatinib, selumetinib, linsitinib, BMS-387032, SCH-727965, and MK-2206 were purchased from Selleckchem.

Viability and invasion assay
For viability/drug treatment assays, cells were seeded in 96-well plates at a concentration of 4 × 104 cells/well with complete culture medium. Cell viability was measured using the AlamarBlue Cell Viability Assay (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to manufacturer's instructions. For EC50 calculations, sigmoidal dose–response curves were fitted using a variable four-parameter nonlinear regression model in GraphPad Prism v.5.01. The invasive potential of parental and resistant BT-474 cell lines was assessed in a transwell assay using BD Matrigel (VWR).

Cell lysis
Prior to harvest, cells were washed two times with PBS. For (phospho)proteome preparation, cells were lysed in 8 mol/L urea, 40 mmol/L Tris/HCl (pH 7.6), 1 × EDTA-free protease inhibitor mixture (complete mini, Roche), and 1 × phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 1, 2, and 3 (Sigma). The lysate was centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 45 minutes at 4°C. For kinobead experiments, cells were lysed in 1× CP buffer (50 mmol/L Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 5% glycerol, 1.5 mmol/L MgCl2, 150 mmol/L NaCl) supplemented with 0.8% NP-40, 1 mmol/L DTT, 25 mmol/L NaF, and freshly added protease and phosphatase inhibitors (5 × phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 1 and 2, Sigma-Aldrich; 1 × phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 3, Sigma-Aldrich; 1 mmol/L Na3VO4). CP buffer protein extracts were clarified by ultracentrifugation at 150,000 × g for 1 hour at 4°C. Protein concentration for phosphoproteome and kinome samples was determined by the Bradford method [Coomassie (Bradford) Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Scientific) and the cleared lysates were stored at −80°C until further use.

Digestion and dimethyl labeling for phospho- and full proteome preparation
The urea-containing lysate was reduced with 10 mmol/L DTT at 56°C for 30 minutes and alkylated with 55 mmol/L CAA for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The protein mixture was diluted with 40 mmol/L Tris/HCl to a final urea concentration of 1.6 mol/L. Digestion was performed by adding sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1: 100 and incubation for 4 hours at 37°C. Subsequently, another 1: 100 trypsin was added for overnight digestion at 37°C. The next day, samples were acidified with TFA to a pH of 2 and desalted using SepPak columns [C18 cartridges Sep-Pak Vac 1 cc (50 mg), Waters Corp., solvent A: 0.07% TFA, solvent B: 0.07% TFA, 50% ACN]. Dimethyl labeling was performed on column as described previously (25).

Fe-IMAC column enrichment and (phospho)peptide fractionation
Phosphopeptide enrichment was essentially performed as described previously (26). Detailed description of high pH reversed-phase micro-column fractionation can be found in the Supplementary Materials and Methods section. Hydrophilic strong anion exchange fractionation of 300 μg Fe-IMAC column flow through into 24 fractions was performed as described previously (26).

Sample preparation for metabolomics experiments
BT-474 and BT-474-J4 cells were seeded in triplicates on 6-well plates at a density of 4 × 105 cells per well. Extra wells were seeded for cell counting. After 24 hours, media were replaced and after 2, 8, and 24 hours, cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, and metabolites were extracted in 0.25-mL lysis buffer containing MeOH/ACN/ddH2O (2:2:1). Samples were centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 15 minutes at 4°C and supernatants were collected for LC/MS analysis. In addition, the media were sampled 8 and 24 hours after exchange. For this, 10 μL of medium was added to 1 mL of lysis buffer containing MeOH/ACN/ddH2O (2:2:1) and prepared as described above.

Kinase affinity pull downs
Kinobead pull downs were conducted in a 96-well plate format as described previously (27, 28).

LC/MS-MS measurements
For full- and phosphoproteome fractions, nanoflow LC/MS-MS was performed by coupling an Agilent 1290 (Agilent Technologies) to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For kinobead eluates, nanoflow LC/MS-MS was performed by coupling an UltiMate 3000 nano LC system (Thermo Scientific) to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For metabolomics experiments, LC/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 autosampler and pump (Thermo, Scientific). Detailed LC and MS parameters can be found in the Supplementary Materials and Methods section.

Statistical analysis
Processing of raw mass spectrometric data was performed using MaxQuant v1.4.0.5 (29). To facilitate further data analysis, the results were either imported into the MaxQuant associated software suite Perseus (v.1.5.0.15; ref. 30) or into Microsoft Excel (Microsoft). Data normalization was performed according to a procedure that will be published elsewhere. A two-sided Student t test was used to assess statistical significance. Phosphopeptide and protein P values were corrected for multiple testing using a permutation-based 1% FDR cutoff (250 randomizations; S0 of 0.5). Metabolites were quantified using LCQUAN software (Thermo Scientific).


=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===
In this study, we used a multilayered proteomic approach to investigate how the small-molecule kinase inhibitor lapatinib acts on responsive, ERBB2-overexpressing breast cancer cells and compared this to the rewired signaling of lapatinib-resistant cells. This setup allowed us to functionally prioritize phosphorylation site and pathway changes in resistance in light of their initial responsiveness to lapatinib, with the rational that re-activation of initially inhibited pathways must be crucial for the resistant phenotype. Collectively, the data confirmed previous observations made using classical biochemical approaches (e.g., PIK3-AKT-MTOR recovery or AXL overexpression; ref. 5), but also provided many new additional molecular insights, of which we are only able to discuss a few.

First, splicing was shown to be heavily affected by short-term lapatinib treatment of parental cells. Splicing is already well known to be implicated in virtually all steps of tumor biology and is frequently involved in oncogenic transformation. Hence, the spliceosome is increasingly recognized as druggable tumor target (40) and specifically so in ERBB2-overexpressing breast cancer (41). Moreover, spliceostatins (or analogues thereof) are known to inhibit parental BT-474 cells with low nanomolar affinity (42). Specifically, we found three sites of the direct spliceostatin A target SF3B to be responsive to lapatinib (43). Impairment of splicing mechanisms might thus represent a previously unrecognized mechanism of lapatinib action in breast cancer. Our analysis also prioritized a set of specific, splicing-related targets based on differential expression of protein isoforms and based on initially responsive sites whose phosphorylation is restored in resistance. Interestingly, one of those proteins is the serine/threonine-protein kinase PRP4 homolog, which has recently been implicated in ESR1 signaling and taxane response in ER+ breast cancer (44) and has been shown to be regulated by ERBB2 in breast cancer cells (45).

Second, the data allowed us to propose a detailed model of signaling adaptor rewiring in resistance. Reestablished phosphorylation might imply a higher relevance of IRS1, GAB2, and INPPL1 for resistance acquisition as compared with several other adaptor proteins that remain dephosphorylated (e.g., SHC1 or IRS2). Whereas GAB2 pY-452 is known to confer resistance against BCR/ABL–targeted therapy, we found GAB2 pY-476 to be important in AXL-mediated resistance [the site is not responsive to short-term lapatinib treatment, highly upregulated in resistance, and known to induce interaction with PIK3R1, the regulatory subunit of PIK3 (46)]. GAB2 is an amplifier of oncogenic signaling, serves as a signaling integrator, and also confers imatinib resistance in chronic myeloid leukemia, which might make it an ideal target for the effective treatment of a diverse set of cancers addicted to deregulated RTKs (47). The same applies to IRS1 and INPPL1, which are known to confer the mitogenic signals of several oncoproteins and have potential therapeutic value (48, 49).

Third, the integrative data analysis suggests that the cell tries to surmount initial inhibitor action by excessive re-activation of initially targeted nodes and pathways (e.g., the spliceosome; Supplementary Fig. S5B), the hormone receptor PGR or the translation-associated kinase EEF2K. Hence, our analysis also singles out phosphorylation sites that might be useful as early markers of resistance onset. The immediate upregulation of the PGR transcription inducing site pS-102 indicates a direct and posttranslational link between lapatinib action and PGR activation, which further emphasizes the emerging paradigm of ERBB2–PGR cross-talk (50). The fact that this activity is lost in resistance (probably at least in part due the loss of PGR expression itself) makes it intriguing to speculate that PGR activity needs to be low to ensure proper survival of ERBB2-overexpressing breast cancer cells.

Fourth, lapatinib treatment of sensitive BT-474 cells is known to affect glycolysis (22) and our analysis unveiled that phosphorylation of S-466 on PFKFB2, a regulator indirectly affecting a rate-limiting step in glycolysis, is inhibited in response to lapatinib treatment but is recovering to initial phosphorylation levels (i.e., to the same extent as nontreated parental cells) in resistance, providing a molecular connection between lapatinib mode of action and therapeutically relevant metabolic reprogramming in resistance. This specific example shows that the analysis of the initial drug mode of action is crucial for the interpretation of phosphorylation changes in resistance, as this observation would have gone unnoticed if parental cells would be compared with resistant cells directly.

Our study demonstrates that resistance in our cell line is characterized by extensive posttranslational changes on glycolytic enzymes. Importantly, the fact that this reprogramming was not apparent from protein expression changes underscores the importance to study posttranslational events in general and phosphorylation in particular. Moreover, metabolic alterations are an established hallmark of cancer and phosphorylation is emerging as a major switch connecting oncogenic protein kinase signaling to modified metabolic activity (51). Indeed, we found many examples where phosphorylation on metabolic enzymes cooccurs with the expected shift of metabolite levels. For example, phosphorylation of PDHA1 at S-293/S-300, which is known to inhibit its enzymatic activity (39), is codetected with a decrease in intracellular Acetyl-CoA abundance and a concomitant secretion of pyruvate. The latter might additionally be promoted by a strong increase in Y-175 phosphorylation of PKM, which is responsible for pyruvate production. PKM is particularly interesting, as it is one of the rate-limiting enzymes in glycolysis and well known to be controlled by kinase signaling (52). Another example is pY-44 of ENO1, which cooccurs with strong and sustained elevation of its enzymatic product 2-phosphoglycerate. Our analysis further uncovered a massive increase in intracellular glucose-6-phosphate levels and phosphorylation of several key enzymes responsible for glycogenolysis (which ultimately results in glucose-6-phosphate production). This might be another way for the resistant cells to fuel glycolysis, which can be targeted.

Some of the detected phosphorylation sites have previously been connected to specific oncogenic kinases. As mentioned above, LDHA Y-10 is known to be phosphorylated by several tyrosine kinases [e.g., FGFR or ABL (37)]. Activated SRC is capable of phosphorylating ENO1 and PGAM1 and PDHA1 S-293 and S-300 are known to be phosphorylated by PDK isoenzymes (53, 39). Other sites on glycolytic enzymes (e.g., PFKP pS-386, GAPDH pS-83) are not yet associated with a specific kinase/phosphatase and provide starting points for further analysis of kinase-mediated metabolic control. Overall, the extent of glycolytic rewiring, the occurrence of various phosphoserine/-threonine as well as phosphotyrosine sites, and the diversity of functionally involved kinases suggest that posttranslational-mediated glycolytic addiction is a collective phenomenon rather than being caused by one single kinase.

Metabolic alterations are increasingly implicated in resistance against kinase inhibitors in general and lapatinib in particular (22–24). Importantly though, all previously described mechanisms are dependent on expression changes. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to show that such a metabolic shift involved in lapatinib resistance can occur exclusively by change of enzymatic activity, which is likely caused by posttranslational regulation. Interestingly, recent reports suggest that metabolites are themselves capable of affecting kinase pathways. For example, lactate, which is found to accumulate in our resistant cell line, has been shown to engage AXL and activate the PIK3 pathway (54). This reciprocal cross-talk might open up exciting new therapeutic opportunities and shows how important it is to understand resistance on a systems-wide level.

Furthermore, our proteomic datasets revealed that mechanisms of resistance acquisition are very heterogeneous and that previously identified resistance drivers can result in different phenotypic changes, depending on the resistant cell line used. This heterogeneity might pose a great challenge in terms of unifying treatment options. Thus, it might be a more efficient strategy to search for common alterations and molecular integrators of different, heterogeneous resistance mechanisms. As an example, several resistance mechanisms observed in ERBB2-overexpressing breast cancer, whether it is AXL, EPHA2, or MET, lead to the reactivation of PIK3, which might consequently be a more attractive node to target (5, 9, 12). Glycolysis is another example: both, our cell line and the resistant cell line from Komurov and colleagues, are sensitive to inhibition of the glycolysis rate-limiting enzyme hexokinase via 2-deoxy glucose treatment independent of the way glycolytic addiction has been acquired (22). Moreover, recent reports also establish a link between hormone receptor overexpression, altered metabolism, MTOR signaling, and lapatinib resistance (23, 24). Although all three aberrations represent individually targetable entities, they seem to depend on each other. Indeed, also in our cell line model estrogen receptor upregulation is responsible for AXL overexpression as shown by Liu and colleagues (5). This interplay between different molecular aberrations implies that there are diverse ways of targeting the resistant phenotype. Selecting the mechanism most commonly occurring might thus emerge as a key step in resistance management.

Finally, our dataset contains many additional observations (e.g., multiple deregulated intracellular/extracellular metabolites, signaling events and kinase targets). For example, we observed a massive secretion of the acidic metabolite glutamate, which is known to promote growth and invasion (55). Given the prevalence of brain metastasis in breast cancer and the observed invasive phenotype connected to lapatinib resistance, knowledge about potential metabolic mechanisms causing or amplifying invasion might ultimately result in better cure of disease. In addition, not only glycolysis is deregulated but we rather find a strong global impact of resistance acquisition on diverse metabolic pathways such as the citric acid cycle, redox signaling, amino acid metabolism, and several more (Supplementary Fig. S5A). These and other findings clearly merit closer inspection, which places this work as a rich resource for further studies.
