=== TITLE ===
In-depth quantitative analysis and comparison of the human hepatocyte and hepatoma cell line HepG2 proteomes

=== ABSTRACT ===
Hepatocytes play a pivotal role in human homeostasis. They are essential in regulation of glucose and lipid levels in blood and play a central role in metabolism of amino acids, lipids, drugs and xenobiotic-compounds. In addition, hepatocytes produce a major portion of proteins circulating in the blood. Hepatocytes were isolated from liver tissue obtained from surgical resections. Proteins were extracted and processed using filter aided sample preparation protocol and were analyzed by LC–MS/MS using high accuracy mass spectrometry. Proteins were quantified by the ‘Total Protein Approach’ and ‘Proteomic Ruler’. We report a comprehensive proteomic analysis of purified human hepatocytes and the human hepatoma cell line HepG2. The complete dataset comprises 9400 proteins and provides a comprehensive and quantitative depiction of the proteomes of hepatocytes and HepG2 cells at the protein titer and copy number dimensions. We describe basic cell organization and in detail energy metabolism pathways and metabolite transport. We provide quantitative insights into protein synthesis and drug and xenobiotics catabolism. Our data delineate differences between the native human hepatocytes and HepG2 cells by providing for the first time quantitative data at protein concentrations and copy numbers.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
2.1. Human hepatocytes
Samples of normal human liver tissue were obtained from 7 donors undergoing surgical resections carried out at the Department of Surgery at Uppsala University Hospital. All donors gave their informed consent. Ethical approval was granted by the Uppsala Regional Ethics Committee (ethical approval no 2009/028). Clinical characteristics of the patients are given in Supplemental Table 1. Hepatocytes were isolated by the two-step collagenase isolation procedure [17] and stored at − 80 °C until subcellular fractionation and proteomic analysis.
2.2. Cell culture
The human hepatoma cells HepG2 (ATCC HB-8065) were grown in Eagle's Minimum Essential Medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum and 1% streptomycin. The cells were harvested at 70% confluence and stored at − 80 °C until proteomic analysis.
2.3. Subcellular fractionation of hepatocytes
The frozen hepatocytes were thawed on ice and suspended in homogenization buffer composed of 0.3 M sucrose, 10 mM MgCl2, and 50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.8. The cells were homogenized at 0 °C in a Teflon-Glass Potter S homogenizer at 1200 rpm with 10 down-up cycles. The crude nuclear fraction was obtained by centrifugation of the homogenate at 1000 × g for 10 min. The post-nuclear supernatant was used for isolation of membrane fractions and cytosol. The crude nuclear pellet was suspended in the HB buffer and the suspension was layered onto a ‘sucrose cushion’ consisting of 2 M sucrose. After centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 20 min the supernatant was discarded and the pellet containing purified nuclei was washed twice with the HB buffer. The post-nuclear supernatant was centrifuged at 200,000 × g for 40 min. The resulting supernatant was designated as ‘cytosol’ whereas the pellet was extracted with 0.1 M Na2C03 and 5 M urea to purify the membrane fractions as described previously [18].
2.4. Sample preparation
The hepatocytes, hepatocyte subcellular fractions, and cultured HepG2 cells were lysed in 0.1 M Tris–HCl, pH 7.6, containing 50 mM DTT and 2% SDS (w/v) in boiling water bath for 4 min. After cooling to room temperature the lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 10 min. The lysates were processed according to the MED-FASP protocol using endoproteinase LysC and trypsin [19]. Total protein and total peptide contents were determined using a tryptophan-fluorescence assay [20]. Peptides were fractionated using pipette tip SAX as described previously [21] The LysC-peptides from whole cell lysates (samples A–G) were fractionated into 4 fractions eluting at pH 12, 6, 4, and 2 whereas the tryptic peptides were eluted at pH 5 and 2. The LysC and tryptic peptides from subcellular fractions (samples D and E) were eluted at pH 5 and 2. Except for fractions D and E the analyses were performed in duplicates. Two samples (F and G) were also processed by PEGylation strategy into two LysC and two tryptic fractions of Cys-depleted peptides and one Cys-enriched peptide fraction [22].
2.5. Mass spectrometry and data analysis
Aliquots of peptides were separated on a reverse phase column and analyzed on a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo) as described previously [7]. Briefly, the peptides were separated on a reverse phase column (20 cm × 75 μm inner diameter) packed with 1.8 μm C18 particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a 4 h acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The liquid chromatography was coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) via a nanoelectrospray source (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific). The QExactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 400 (transient time 256 ms). Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge ≥ + 2 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.6 Th and fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energies of 25. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 20 ms and 60 ms, respectively. The ion target value for both scan modes were set to 106. The dynamic exclusion was 25 s and 10 ppm.
2.6. Data analysis
The raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant Software (Ver. 1.2.6.20) using the human UniProt database (Vers. May 2013). The search was performed with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da and parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm. The protein and peptide false discovery rates were set to 1%. Protein abundances were calculated from the spectral raw intensities using the ‘Total Protein Approach’ [9], [23] using the relationships:
or
The total protein content of the cells and the protein copy number per cells was assessed using the ‘Proteomic Ruler’ approach assuming a DNA content of human cells of 6.5 pg [10] using the relationship:
and
where NA is the Avogadro number. The calculations were performed in Microsoft Excel (Supplemental Table 2, sheet ‘Histone ruler’).
2.7. Statistical analysis
Protein concentration and copy number data were processed using Perseus software 1.5.0.8 (http://www.perseus-framework.org/). For the calculation of significances of protein abundance differences between hepatocytes (7 values) and HepG2 cells (3 values) the minimal number of values was set to 7 per protein. 6129 proteins passed this filter. Imputation of missing values occurred through generation of random numbers that are drawn from a normal distribution. The parameters of this distribution can be optimized to simulate a typical abundance region that the missing values would have if they had been measured. We used the parameter values of 0.3 for width and 1.8 for down shift. Typically the missing values simulate low abundance measurements. The t-test significances were calculated using the threshold of 0.05 FDR (Supplemental Table 3).

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

