=== TITLE ===
In-Depth Quantitative Proteomic
Analysis of de Novo
Protein Synthesis Induced by Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor

=== ABSTRACT ===
Measuring the synthesis of new proteins
in the context of a much
greater number of pre-existing proteins can be difficult. To overcome
this obstacle, bioorthogonal noncanonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT)
can be combined with stable isotope labeling by amino acid in cell
culture (SILAC) for comparative proteomic analysis of de novo protein
synthesis (BONLAC). In the present study, we show that alkyne resin-based
isolation of l -azidohomoalanine (AHA)-labeled proteins using
azide/alkyne cycloaddition minimizes contamination from pre-existing
proteins. Using this approach, we isolated and identified 7414 BONCAT-labeled
proteins. The nascent proteome isolated by BONCAT was very similar
to the steady-state proteome, although transcription factors were
highly enriched by BONCAT. About 30% of the methionine residues were
replaced by AHA in our BONCAT samples, which allowed for identification
of methionine-containing peptides. There was no bias against low-methionine
proteins by BONCAT at the proteome level. When we applied the BONLAC
approach to screen for brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)-induced
protein synthesis, 53 proteins were found to be significantly changed
2 h after BDNF stimulation. Our study demonstrated that the newly
synthesized proteome, even after a short period of stimulation, can
be efficiently isolated by BONCAT and analyzed to a depth that is
similar to that of the steady-state proteome.

=== INTRODUCTION ===
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based
quantitative proteomics is a powerful
tool to study dynamic protein synthesis. Stable isotope labeling by
amino acid in cell culture (SILAC) 1 is
widely used in protein turnover (synthesis/degradation) studies. 2 This involves switching cells from regular culture
medium to heavy SILAC medium that contains heavy isotope coded amino
acids. All newly synthesized proteins from this point on are labeled
by the heavy SILAC medium and thus can be easily distinguished in
MS from pre-existing proteins. A variant of SILAC, pulsed SILAC 3 (pSILAC), uses two different heavy labels and
thus allows comparison of newly synthesized protein levels between
two experimental conditions. However, measuring the synthesis of new
proteins over a relatively short period of time such as a few hours
can be difficult due to a vast excess of pre-existing proteins.

Another method to distinguish newly synthesized proteins from old
proteins is bioorthogonal noncanonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT). 4 In BONCAT, proteins are metabolically labeled
with l -azidohomoalaine (AHA), a methionine surrogate. The
azide moiety from AHA allows labeled proteins to be covalently conjugated
to alkyne-containing tags through azide/alkyne cycloaddition click
chemistry. These tags can be engineered to include fluorescent reporters
to allow selective visualization of new proteins. 4 , 5 Alternatively,
for proteomic analysis, they can include affinity tags, such as biotin,
which can be used to isolate newly synthesized proteins from total
proteins prior to MS analysis. 6 , 7

Combining BONCAT
and pSILAC techniques allows for comparative analysis
of newly synthesized proteins in a high background of pre-existing
proteins. This strategy was first applied to study secreted proteins 8 and translation in primary cells 9 and now is becoming increasingly popular. 10 , 11 Although one version of the combination 8 of BONCAT and pSILAC has been referred to as QuaNCAT, 9 we prefer the term BONLAC because SILAC is used
for quantitation.

In this study, we performed a comprehensive
characterization of
the BONLAC approach in terms of its ability to identify and quantify
the nascent proteome that is synthesized within a relatively short
time period, and we used this approach to screen for brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF)-induced proteins in HEK cells with stable
expression of tropomyosin-related kinase B (TrkB). BDNF regulates
many important aspects of neural function, including cell survival,
cell fate decisions, axon growth, dendrite pruning, and long-term
potentiation, a form of synaptic plasticity considered to be a cellular
substrate for memory formation. 12 , 13 BDNF initiates intracellular
signaling primarily through the receptor tyrosine kinase TrkB. 14 Activated TrkB eventually leads to translation
of selected target mRNAs. However, the list of target mRNAs has yet
to be completely characterized.

Our in-depth BONLAC and pSILAC
analyses of newly synthesized proteins
upon BDNF treatment characterized the performance of the BONCAT methodology
in a large-scale proteomic study. A group of 53 proteins was found
to have increased abundance after BDNF treatment.

=== METHODS ===
HEK-293 cells overexpressing TrkB receptor
(HEK-TrkB) were cultured in DMEM medium (Athena Environmental Sciences,
Baltimore, MD) (methionine, 0.201 mM; lysine, 0.798 mM; arginine,
0.398 mM) supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco) to confluence. The culture
medium was removed, and cells were washed with PBS. Then, cells were
incubated in a culture medium without methionine, lysine, and arginine
(Athena Environmental Sciences, Baltimore, MD) for 30 min. One cell
population was exposed to DMEM medium supplemented with l -azidohomoalanine (AHA, 1 mM, synthesized as described by Link et
al. 15 ), BDNF (25 ng/mL, Peptrotech), and 13 C 6 - 15 N 2 -lysine and 13 C 6 - 15 N 4 -arginine (Lys8/Arg10)
for 2 h, and a control population was exposed to AHA and D 4 -lysine/ 13 C 6 -arginine (Lys4/Arg6). The SILAC
amino acid concentrations were the same as those in the regular DMEM.
In a replicate experiment, the SILAC labeling was reversed (BDNF was
added to cells exposed to Lys4/Arg6).

The enrichment procedures
including cell lysis and tryptic digestion were performed using a
kit (Click-iT Protein Enrichment Kit) from Invitrogen, following the
protocol supplied with the kit with minor modifications. 8 Briefly, after labeling and BDNF treatment, cells
were lysed in a buffer containing 8 M urea, 200 mM Tris, pH 8, 4%
CHAPS, 1 M NaCl, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Lysates
of the BDNF treated/untreated cells were combined in equal volume.
The mixed lysate was sonicated to reduce viscosity. AHA-labeled nascent
proteins were cross-linked covalently to alkyne agarose beads using
reagents provided by the kit. Beads were transferred to a SDS wash
buffer (1% SDS, 100 mM Tris, pH 8, 250 mM NaCl, and 5 mM EDTA), and
proteins on beads were then reduced with DTT at 70 °C and alkylated
with iodoacetamide at room temperature. The beads then were washed
sequentially with 100 column volumes of the following three buffers
to remove nonspecific binding proteins: (1) SDS wash buffer, (2) 8
M urea, and (3) 20% acetonitrile. Cross-linked proteins were digested
with trypsin on-resin at 37 °C overnight in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate,
and the resulting tryptic peptides were desalted using StageTips 16 and dried under vacuum in a SpeedVac device.

Cells were lysed with
a solution containing 9 M urea, 20 mM Tris, pH 8, 0.2 mM EDTA, and
protease inhibitors (Complete tablet; Roche, Mannheim, Germany). Proteins
were then reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide prior
to overnight digestion with trypsin at 37 °C. 17 The tryptic peptides were desalted using StageTips and
dried.

The peptides
were fractionated using hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography
(HILIC) according to a previously published protocol. 18 All HILIC experiments were performed on an Agilent 1100
HPLC system using a 1 × 250 mm TSKgel Amide-80 5 μm particle
column (Tosoh Biosciences). Peptides were loaded in 90% solvent B
(98% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA). Solvent A consisted of 2% acetonitrile
with 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with an inverse gradient of 90%
B to 85% B in 5 min followed by 85% B to 70% B in 40 min and finally
a steep gradient to 0% B in 5 min at 0.05 mL/min. Twelve fractions
were collected from HILIC separation and analyzed by LC–MS.
Ten of these fractions contained peptides.

For
LC–MS, a Thermo Scientific
EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer 19 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. A self-packed
75 μm × 25 cm reversed-phase column (Reprosil C18, 3 μm,
Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) was used for peptide separation. Peptides
were eluted by a gradient of 3–30% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic
acid over 120 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min at 45 °C. The
Q Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired
at a resolution of 50 000 at m / z 400 (transient time = 256 ms). Up to the top 10 most abundant precursors
from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.6
Thomsons and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation
with normalized collision energies of 27. The maximum ion injection
times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 60 ms, respectively,
and the ion target value for both scan modes was set to 1 000 000.

The raw files
were processed using the MaxQuant 20 computational
proteomics platform (version 1.2.7.0) for peptide identification and
quantitation. The fragmentation spectra were searched against the
UniProt human protein database (downloaded Feb 08, 2013) containing
87 647 protein sequences and allowing up to two missed tryptic
cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification,
and oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation, D 4 -lysine, 13 C 6 -arginine, 13 C 6 - 15 N 2 -lysine, and 13 C 6 - 15 N 4 -arginine were used as variable
modifications for database searching. For the click-chemistry enriched
BONCAT samples, AHA (−4.9863 Da) and l -2,4-diaminobutanoate
(−30.9768 Da) were also used as variable modifications for
methionine. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to
7 and 20 ppm, respectively. Both peptide and protein identifications
were filtered at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and thus were not dependent
on the peptide score. Perseus (version 1.4.1.3) was used to determine
significantly changed proteins upon BDNF treatment based on significance
B values for quantified proteins at a FDR of 1% using a Benjamini–Hochberg
correction for multiple hypothesis testing. Significance B values
are p values for detection of significant outlier
protein ratios calculated on the protein subsets obtained by intensity
binning. 20 Each BONLAC and pSILAC experiment
was performed with two biological replicates, with labels reversed
between replicates, and each biological replicate was analyzed twice
by LC–MS. In order for a protein to be designated as having
differential expression, it had to have passed the 1% FDR filter as
described above for both the forward and reverse biological replicates.
All raw LC–MS data files are freely available and can be downloaded
from the following site: http://massive.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/status.jsp?task=f80fc3ba51f54b0e815ac085eb50ce0c

To find statistically significantly
overrepresented gene ontology (GO) terms and motifs, DAVID 21 (the database for annotation, visualization
and integrated discovery, version 6.7) online function annotation
tool was used. For retrieving protein interactions and constructing
protein interaction networks, the STRING database 22 (version 9.1) was used. Cytoscape (version 3.1.0) was used
to plot the protein interaction network exported by STRING.

pr5006982_si_002.xlsx

pr5006982_si_003.xlsx

=== RESULTS ===
BONCAT has been used to isolate newly synthesized proteins from
pre-existing ones in previous proteomic studies. In most of these
published studies, 6 , 7 , 9 − 11 , 23 , 24 AHA-labeled proteins were coupled to a biotin-alkyne tag and then
isolated through avidin-based affinity purification. It was reported
that using such a strategy newly synthesized proteins comprised only
10–20% of the isolated proteins. 9 In the present study, we used a different enrichment method in which
AHA-labeled proteins are coupled directly to alkyne agarose resin. 8 After stringent washes to remove nonspecific
binding proteins, the resin-bound proteins were digested prior to
LC–MS analysis.

To assess the level of the nonlabeled
proteins in our BONCAT samples, we performed the alkyne-based BONCAT
sample preparation using HEK-TrKB cells that were labeled with AHA
for 2 h and compared these results to a control experiment in which
the same sample preparation was performed with the same amount of
lysate from unlabeled cells. Both the BONCAT and the control samples
were analyzed by LC–MS. The sample preparation was repeated
three times. We consistently identified dramatically more peptides
from the BONCAT samples (2371, 2578, and 2681) than from the control
samples (69, 19 and 83) at 1% FDR. Moreover, the peptides from the
control samples generally had very low signals compared to those from
the BONCAT samples (Figure 1 ; see Supporting Information Figure S1 for a replicate
result). This result shows that the alkyne resin-based enrichment
method has minimal contamination from non-AHA-labeled proteins and
can be used to isolate high-purity nascent proteomes. This result
represents a substantial improvement compared to the biotin tag-based
approach because very stringent washing conditions can be used to
efficiently remove nonspecific binding proteins without causing loss
of target proteins.

Assessing the level of nonspecific binding proteins for
enrichment
of AHA-labeled proteins using alkyne resin-based click chemistry.
Equal amounts of AHA-labeled or unlabeled (control) HEK cell lysates
were used for the enrichment. Histograms of peptide intensities for
the AHA labeled and the control samples are shown.

To determine
changes in protein synthesis induced by BDNF–TrkB signaling
and to compare the performance of the two proteomic strategies, BONCAT/pSILAC(BONLAC)
and pSILAC only (i.e., without enrichment of AHA-labeled proteins),
we performed two experiments, as illustrated in Figure 2 . For the BONCAT experiment, HEK cells overexpressing TrkB
were incubated in two different types of SILAC media that contained
two sets of heavy isotope-labeled arginines and lysines (Arg4/Lys6
and Arg10/Lys8) and AHA for 2 h. In one condition of the AHA-SILAC
media, BDNF also was included to activate the TrkB pathway. The two
cell populations were then combined in a 1:1 ratio and lysed. The
newly synthesized proteins, which were labeled by both AHA and SILAC,
were isolated using azide/alkyne cycloaddition click chemistry. After
on-resin tryptic digestion of proteins, the resulting peptides were
fractionated by hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC), and
the fractions were analyzed by LC–MS for protein identification
and quantitation. This experiment is referred to as the BONLAC experiment
hereafter.

Schematic BONLAC and pSILAC workflows to investigate protein synthesis
induced by BDNF signaling. HEK cells overexpressing TrkB were treated
or left untreated with BDNF for 2 h. Concomitant with the treatment,
the cells were labeled with SILAC and AHA. The samples were then mixed
and analyzed using two workflows. In the BONLAC workflow, AHA-labeled
proteins were separated from pre-existing proteins prior to LC–MS
analysis, whereas in the pSILAC workflow, proteins were analyzed without
the isolation step. Two biological replicates were performed with
the SILAC labeling switched, and each biological replicate was analyzed
twice by LC–MS.

For the purpose of comparison, a parallel experiment was
performed
using the same workflow described above except that the click chemistry
enrichment step was omitted. This was essentially a pSILAC experiment.
Approximately the same amount of BONLAC and pSILAC peptides (10 μg)
was used for HILIC and LC–MS. This experiment is referred to
as the pSILAC experiment.

From the pSILAC experiment result,
SILAC label incorporation was
estimated to be ∼1.7% based on relative signal intensities
of light and medium/heavy peptide signals. In the BONLAC proteins,
SILAC incorporation was dramatically higher, with a median value of
76% (Figure 3 ; see Supporting
Information Figure S2 for a replicate result). Essentially
all proteins identified from the BONLAC experiment were SILAC-labeled,
demonstrating its power to enrich for newly synthesized proteins.
It is noted that the incorporation of labeled amino acids was lower
than 100%, most likely caused by residual light lysine and arginine
in the cells.

SILAC label incorporation of proteins identified from
the BONLAC
and pSILAC analyses.

From the BONLAC experiment, 7474 proteins were identified
(1% FDR).
(See Supporting Information Table S1 for
details.) To our knowledge, this represents the most comprehensive
proteomic analysis of newly synthesized proteome isolated by BONCAT
to date. From the pSILAC samples, 7144 proteins were identified. (See Supporting Information Table S2 for details.)
Because the pSILAC samples had very low SILAC incorporation, proteins
identified from these samples represent the steady-state proteome.
There was a remarkable overlap between proteins identified from the
BONLAC and pSILAC experiments: 6389 proteins were identified in both
(85% of BONLAC proteins and 89% of pSILAC proteins). The MS intensities
of proteins from the two samples were also strongly correlated (Figure 4 ; see Supporting Information Figure S3 for a replicate result). These results suggest that the
proteome being actively synthesized closely mirrored the steady-state
proteome. More importantly, our result shows that BONLAC can be used
to study the whole nascent proteome with coverage similar to that
of the steady-state proteome.

Correlation of protein intensities between the
newly synthesized
proteome (identified from the BONLAC experiment) and the steady-state
proteome (identified from the pSILAC experiment).

In total, 8229 proteins were identified from the two experiments,
with 1085 identified only by BONLAC and 722 only by pSILAC. A gene
ontology enrichment analysis was performed for the groups of proteins
unique to BONLAC. The result shows that transcription factors are
highly enriched in these proteins ( p -value = 2.94
× 10 –40 ). Using a manually curated transcription
factor database 25 that contains 1391 transcription
factors, 483 transcription factors were found by BONLAC and 253 by
pSILAC. Two-hundred eighteen transcription factors were found by both
protocols. GO analysis on proteins unique to pSILAC revealed no significantly
enriched GO terms. It is unlikely that the enrichment of transcription
factors in the BONLAC samples was due to greater rates of synthesis
for transcription factor proteins because the SILAC incorporation
levels of transcription factors in general were not significantly
higher than those of other proteins.

Taken together, these results
suggest BONCAT is efficient in capturing
transcription factors.

In
theory, when using the alkyne resin-based approach, peptides with
methionine in their sequence should not be identified from BONCAT
samples because those peptides would remain attached to the resin
via their AHA residues (substituted for methionine) after digestion,
but, in fact, about 20% of all peptides identified from the BONLAC
samples contain at least one methionine, which is only moderately
lower than that of the pSILAC samples (26%). This suggests that methionines
in the newly synthesized proteins were only partially replaced by
AHA. To assess the level of AHA label, we compared peptide intensities
measured from the BONLAC and pSILAC samples (Figure 5 ; see Supporting Information Figure
S4 for a replicate result). There was a shift between the intensity
ratio distributions of methionine-containing peptides and non-methionine-containing
peptides, which was caused by partial replacement of methionine by
AHA. On the basis of the shift, the estimated occurrence ratio of
AHA to methionine in BONCAT samples is 3 to 7, i.e., only 30% of methionine
in the newly synthesized proteins were replaced by AHA.

Assessing the
level of AHA-methionine replacement. Intensity ratio
histograms for non-methionine-containing peptides (blue) and methionine-containing
peptides (red) are shown. Normalization was performed so that the
median ratio for non-methionine-containing peptides is 1:1. The median
log 2 ratio for methionine-containing peptides is 0.524
(indicated by dashed line), which corresponds to an AHA/methionine
ratio of 3:7 for BONLAC proteins.

In addition to methionine peptides, we also identified some
AHA
peptides, as a result of incomplete click chemistry reaction. However,
these peptides account for only 0.4% of all identified peptides, suggesting
very high efficiency of the azide/alkyne cycloaddition click chemistry
reaction. In addition, in 19% of these AHA peptides, AHA was in the
reduced form of l -2,4-diaminobutanoate, suggesting that during
the sample preparation reduction of AHA is a common, but not dominant,
side reaction.

A potential concern of the BONCAT approach is that
proteins with
low numbers of methionines are under-represented because the enrichment
step requires the presence of AHA (substituted for methionine) in
target proteins. This bias can be aggravated by low AHA labeling levels.
A previous BONCAT study has reported that there is no such bias. 8 However, in that study, only secreted proteins
were considered. In addition, most of the proteins were identified
after 24 h of AHA labeling; thus, the level of AHA-methionine substitution
is expected to be much higher than that in this study, which used
only 2 h of AHA labeling. We compared the distributions of proteins
containing different numbers of methionines for the BONLAC and pSILAC
experiments (Figure 6 ; see Supporting Information Figure S5 for a replicate result).
The result shows that the BONLAC and pSILAC proteins had almost identical
density curves, indicating that, at the whole proteome level, there
was no bias against low-methionine count proteins even with an AHA/methionine
ratio of 3:7 in newly synthesized proteins.

BONCAT did not over-
or under-represent methionine-containing proteins.
Distribution of identification frequency of proteins with different
numbers of methionines is shown for the BONLAC and pSILAC experiments.

Of the identified BONLAC proteins,
7176 out of the 7414 were quantified by SILAC, and 53 proteins showed
consistent and significant SILAC ratio changes upon BNDF treatment
at 1% FDR (Figure 7 and Table 1 ; for details, see Supporting Information Tables S1 and S2). For the pSILAC analysis, only 1840 out of 7144
identified proteins were quantified due to the low signals for the
medium and heavy SILAC-labeled peptides. Only one protein (ADAMTS1)
had significant SILAC ratio changes. This protein also was identified
as a changing protein by BONLAC. The dramatic difference between the
two experiments in the ability to quantify newly synthesized proteins
highlights the importance of BONCAT enrichment prior to quantitation.

Identification
of proteins whose synthesis rates were significantly
changed upon BDNF treatment. Protein SILAC ratios from two biological
replicates are shown, with significantly changed proteins marked in
red (FDR = 0.01 in both replicates).

TF, transcription
factor.

Among the 53 proteins
were some well-known BDNF-induced proteins
such as Jun, 26 Fos, 26 CDKN1A, 27 Arc, 28 and early growth response proteins (EGR1 and EGR2). 29 MKD-1 is a phosphatase known to be induced by
BDNF in primary neurons. 30 This confirmed
that the BONLAC approach was able to detect previously confirmed and
biologically relevant BDNF target proteins. Most of the proteins in
Table 1 have not heretofore been associated
with BDNF signaling. A gene ontology analysis of the 53 changing proteins
revealed that transcription regulator activity is highly enriched:
24 of the 53 proteins have transcription regulator activity ( p -value: 5 × 10 –11 ) and 16 of the
53 proteins are transcription factors according to the transcription
factor database. 25 To find the connections
between the changing proteins, we used these proteins as an input
to retrieve known protein interactions from the STRING protein interaction
database. This resulted in a strongly connected network, which includes
36 of the 53 proteins (Figure 8 ), suggesting
that the list of changing proteins identified in BONLAC is not a random
list. Most proteins have not been previously reported to be involved
in BDNF signaling and thus represent novel candidates for BDNF-induced
proteins.

Protein interaction network for proteins with changed SILAC ratios
from the BONLAC analysis. BDNF is included to form a more complete
network. Nodes in red are previously reported BDNF-induced proteins.
Lines connecting nodes represent protein interactions documented in
the STRING database used. Red lines represent physical protein–protein
binding. Black lines represent functional regulation/association.

=== CONCLUSION ===
In
proteomic analysis, the strength of BONCAT lies in its ability
to separate newly synthesized proteins from pre-existing ones. Therefore,
a key question is how clean the BONCAT protein preparation is. Our
results indicate that it is possible to isolate newly synthesized
proteins using BONCAT with minimal contamination from pre-existing
proteins. This not only facilitates proteins identification/quantitation
for the isolated nascent proteome but also opens the door to combining
BONCAT with quantitation methods other than SILAC such as chemical
labeling methods and label-free methods. This will be important for
BONCAT applications for which it is difficult to use SILAC labeling.

We used BONCAT to purify a newly synthesized proteome and characterize
it to a depth of 7414 proteins. To our knowledge, this is the most
comprehensive MS analysis of a newly synthesized proteome. This result
demonstrates that BONCAT enables in-depth proteomic analysis of newly
synthesized proteins with coverage similar to that of a steady-state
proteome. Our result also shows that the majority of the steady-state
proteome can be readily captured by BONCAT. An interesting observation
is that transcription factors were enriched efficiently by BONCAT.
Thus, BONCAT can be used as a tool to investigate this important category
of proteins. This observation might have been caused by the following:
(1) transcription factors have fast degradation rates. This is supported
by a previous study that shows transcription factor mRNAs have significantly
increased average decay rates compared with those of other transcripts. 31 (2) Some transcription factors were induced
by BDNF. However, this should not be a major contribution, as we found
that a relatively small number of transcription factors were activated
by BDNF.

We also found that the extent of AHA replacement of
methionine
residues in our BONCAT samples was about 30%. This was most likely
due to residual methionine inside the cell even after 30 min of methionine
starvation before AHA labeling. Because methionine is preferred over
AHA in vivo for protein synthesis, even low levels of methionine in
the cell can significantly decrease the level of AHA labeling. However,
we believe incomplete AHA labeling is beneficial for BONCAT analysis
because methionine-containing peptides, which account for about one-quarter
of all peptides, can be identified and thus contribute to protein
identification and quantitation. These peptides would not be detected
in the case of 100% AHA labeling because they would be attached to
alkyne beads by click chemistry and cannot be recovered for LC–MS
analysis. A high AHA labeling level could be considered beneficial
because, in theory, it might improve BONCAT protein recovery. However,
our results indicate that the azide/alkyne cycloaddition click chemistry
yield is very high and thus a higher AHA level does not necessarily
translate into higher recovery. On the contrary, for the alkyne resin-based
approach, excessive AHA can cause a reduction in identification of
methionine-containing peptides, which in turn compromises protein
identification and quantitation. Our data show that at a 30% AHA level,
protein identification was not affected by AHA labeling and little
bias was observed against low-methionine count proteins. Another potential
disadvantage of high AHA levels in labeling media is that AHA can
change intracellular signaling and protein expression profiles. Therefore,
AHA labeling parameters (including AHA concentration and methionine
starvation time) are worthy of attention when designing an experiment
to ensure sufficient protein recovery and at the same time minimize
adverse effects.

Application of the BONLAC (BONCAT/pSILAC) approach
to the study
of the BDNF signaling pathway resulted in the identification of 53
proteins whose translation was significantly changed by BDNF treatment.
This not only provides novel candidates of BDNF signaling for further
biological investigation but also confirms the capability of BONLAC
to reveal biologically relevant translational events with deep coverage
and high accuracy.
