=== TITLE ===
Proteome-wide analysis of arginine monomethylation reveals widespread occurrence in human cells.

=== ABSTRACT ===
The posttranslational modification of proteins by arginine methylation is functionally important, yet the breadth of this modification is not well characterized. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we identified 8030 arginine methylation sites within 3300 human proteins in human embryonic kidney 293 cells, indicating that the occurrence of this modification is comparable to phosphorylation and ubiquitylation. A site-level conservation analysis revealed that arginine methylation sites are less evolutionarily conserved compared to arginines that were not identified as modified by methylation. Through quantitative proteomics and RNA interference to examine arginine methylation stoichiometry, we unexpectedly found that the protein arginine methyltransferase (PRMT) family of arginine methyltransferases catalyzed methylation independently of arginine sequence context. In contrast to the frequency of somatic mutations at arginine methylation sites throughout the proteome, we observed that somatic mutations were common at arginine methylation sites in proteins involved in mRNA splicing. Furthermore, in HeLa and U2OS cells, we found that distinct arginine methyltransferases differentially regulated the functions of the pre-mRNA splicing factor SRSF2 (serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 2) and the RNA transport ribonucleoprotein HNRNPUL1 (heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein U-like 1). Knocking down PRMT5 impaired the RNA binding function of SRSF2, whereas knocking down PRMT4 [also known as coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1)] or PRMT1 increased the RNA binding function of HNRNPUL1. High-content single-cell imaging additionally revealed that knocking down CARM1 promoted the nuclear accumulation of SRSF2, independent of cell cycle phase. Collectively, the presented human arginine methylome provides a missing piece in the global and integrative view of cellular physiology and protein regulation.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Cell culture and transfection HEK293, HeLa, and U2OS cells were grown in Dulbecco’ s modified Ea- gle’ s medium (DMEM; Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and penicillin/streptomycin (100 U/ml) (Gibco). Stable HeLa- Kyoto cells expressing SMARCA5, EIF4B, EIF3I, CBX4, SRSF1, SRSF2, RFC5, EEF1A1 FUS, and GFP tagged with C-terminal GFP under the con- trol of an endogenous promoter were generated by transfecting BAC trans- genes and were provided by A. Hyman (Max Planck Institute, Dresden). Cell lines expressing GFP-tagged MCM6 and SMC1A were provided by M. Vermeulen (Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen). Se- lection was maintained by adding G418 (400 mg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich) to the culture medium. SILAC HEK293 cells were grown in SILAC DMEM (In- vitrogen) supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS, L-glutamine, penicillin/ streptomycin, and either L-lysine and L-arginine, L-lysine 4,4,5,5-D4 and L-arginine–U-13C6, or L-lysine–U-13C6-15N2 and L-arginine–U-13C6- 15N4 (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) (66). The siRNA oligonucleotides against endogenous proteins were purchased from Life Technologies for hu- man PRMT1 (ID: 10000), PRMT4 (Stealth PRMT4/CARM1 siRNAs; set of 3: HSS116113, HSS116114, and HSS116115), PRMT5 (ID: 135623), and Negative Control siRNA#1. siRNA transfections were performed using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’ s protocol and lysed 48 hours after transfection. Cells were treated with 100 nM EPZ015666 (Selleckchem) for 48 hours. Sample preparation Cells were harvested by washing with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and lysed in modified radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer [50 mM tris (pH 7.5), 400 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, and 0.1% Na- deoxycholate] supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 2 mM Na-orthovanadate, 5 mM NaF, and 5 mM glycero-2-phosphate. Ly- sates were sonicated and then cleared by high-speed centrifugation. Proteins were precipitated by adding fourfold excess volumes of ice-cold acetone and stored at−20°C overnight. Subsequently , proteins were solubilized in a urea solution [6 M urea/2 M thiourea/10 mM Hepes (pH 8.0)]. The RIPA cell pellets were resuspended in 6 M urea/2 M thiourea/10 mM Hepes, sonicated, and, after additional centrifugation, combined with the already solubilized proteins. Protein concentrations in lysates were measured using Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Next, proteins were reduced by adding dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 1 mM and alkylated with chloroacetamide at 5.5 mM. Proteins were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C (1:100, w/w) and modified sequencing grade trypsin (1:100, w/w) after a fourfold dilution in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Pro- tease digestion was terminated by slow addition of trifluoroacetic acid to pH 2. Precipitates were removed by centrifugation for 10 min at 3000g. Peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters). Peptides were eluted off the Sep-Pak with 50% acetonitrile, and the acetonitrile was then removed by vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were subsequently fractionated by HpH fractionation (see separate experi- mental procedure). HpH reversed-phase prefractionation Ten milligrams of peptide mixture from biological samples was fractionated using a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 mm 4.6 × 250 mm column on an UltiMate 3000 HPLC (high-performance liquid chromatography) system (Dionex) operating at 1 ml/min as previously described (67). Buffer A was Milli-Q water and buffer B was 100% acetonitrile. Buffer C consisted of 25 mM ammonium hydroxide and was constantly introduced throughout the gradient at 10%. A similar injection protocol and gradient were used for all fractionation experiments; all fractions were collected using a Dionex AFC-3000 fraction collector in a 24–deep well plate at 1-min intervals. Samples were initially loaded onto the column at 1 ml/min for 4 min, after which the fractionation gradient commenced as follows: 5% B to 25% B in 62 min, 60% B in 5 min, and ramped to 70% B for 3 min. At this point, fraction collection was halted, and the gradient was held at 70% B for 5 min before being ramped back to 5% B, where the column was then washed and equilibrated and injection of buffer C was halted. The total number of fractions concatenated was set to 14 throughout all experiments. Enrichment of peptides modified with omega-NG-MMA After HpH fractionation, the acetonitrile and the ammonium hydroxide as well as the volume of the concatenated samples were reduced by vacuum centrifugation at 60°C. Appropriate amount of PTMScan IAP Buffer (10×) (Cell Signaling) to make the concentration 1× was added to the fractionated peptide samples. Two vials of PTMScan Mono-Methyl Arginine Motif [mme-RG] Immunoaffinity Beads were equally distributed in the 14 sam- ples and incubated rotating for 2 hours at 4°C. The immunoprecipitates were washed three times in ice-cold immunoprecipitation buffer followed by three washes in water, and modified peptides were eluted with 2 × 50 ml of 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid in Milli-Q water. Peptide eluates were desalted on reversed-phase C18 StageTips as described previously (68). MS analysis All MS experiments were performed on a nanoscale EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF equipped with a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each peptide fraction was eluted off the StageTip, autosampled, and separated on a 15-cm analytical column (75 mm inner diameter) in-house packed with 1.9-mm C18 beads (Reprosil Pur-AQ, Dr. Maisch) using a 77-min gradient ranging from 5 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The effluent from the HPLC was directly elec- trosprayed into the MS. The Q Exactive HF was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, and all samples were analyzed using a previously de- scribed“sensitive” acquisition method (69). Backbone fragmentation of eluting peptide species was obtained using higher-energy collisional dis- sociation (HCD), which ensured high-mass accuracy on both precursor and fragment ions (70). Identification of peptides and proteins All raw data analysis was performed with MaxQuant software suite version 1.2.6.20 supported by the Andromeda search engine (71, 72). Data were searched against a concatenated target/decoy (forward and reverse) version of the UniProt Human fasta database encompassing 71,434 protein entries (downloaded from www.uniprot.org on 7 March 2013). Mass tolerance for searches was set to a maximum of 7 parts per million (ppm) for peptide masses and 20 ppm for HCD fragment ion masses, making it possible to distinguish arginine monomethylation from other amino acid combinations (such as Ile + Gly, Leu + Gly, and Val + Ala) or from other modified residues such as acetylated lysine residues despite the mass discrepancies only being 66 ppm. Data were searched with carbamidomethylation as a fixed modifi- cation and protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and mono- methylation on lysine and arginine as variable modifications. A maximum of three miscleavages was allowed while requiring strict trypsin specificity, and only peptides with a minimum sequence length of seven were con- sidered for further data analysis. Peptide assignments were statistically eval- uated in a Bayesian model on the basis of sequence length and Andromeda score. Only peptides and proteins with an FDR of less than 1% were accepted, estimated on the basis of the number of accepted reverse hits, and FDR values were finally estimated separately for modified and un- modified peptides. Protein sequences of common contaminants such as human keratins and proteases used were added to the database. For SILAC quantification, a minimum of two ratio counts was required. See also the supplementary note in the Supplementary Materials. Bioinformatics analyses Statistical analysis and hierarchical clustering were performed using Perseus (Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich). Significantly enriched GO terms were determined using the Functional Annotation Tool of the DAVID Bio- informatics database version 6.8 Beta (73). Protein interaction networks were analyzed using the interaction data from the STRING database (v. 9.05) (74) and visualized using Cytoscape (v. 2.8.3) (75). Sequence motif analyses were performed using the iceLogo web server (23). The evolutionary conservation analysis was based on the pairwise com- parison of methylated and nonmethylated arginine positions to positions within homologous proteins of eukaryotic species using eggNOG’ s multiple sequence alignments (76). Methylated arginine positions were based on MS data, whereas nonmethylated arginines were randomly selected. UniProt accession numbers were mapped to Ensembl proteins (ENSPs) using STRING’ s (76)“proteins-aliases” resource. The presence or absence of arginines at the methylated and nonmethylated positions within the align- ments was counted, and the overall percentage of arginines at the re- spective positions was calculated for each species. The comparison was restricted to species classified as“core” in STRING, because of the quality and functional annotation of their genomes. We have made use of eggNOG’ s “fine-grained orthologs” functionality to refine the selection of ENSPs used for comparison within each COG, in order to strengthen the specificity of the comparison and to mitigate the elevated influence a multitude of homologous ENSPs of a single species within a COG would have on the overall results of the given species. iTOL and phyloT (77, 78) were used to generate a phylogenetic tree, which was the basis for the succession of species in ascending degree of evolutionary distance to H. sapiens. For mapping of somatic mutations, we downloaded the most recent ver- sion of the COSMIC database (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic) contain- ing 3,534,058 somatic mutations, of which 469,855 mutations (corresponding to 13.3% of total) specifically occurred at arginine residues. These arginine somatic mutations were mapped onto the identified arginine methylation sites, and as control, we additionally mapped mutations onto arginine resi- dues detected within the same protein as not being methylated (referred to as nonmodified arginine residues). GFP and methylated protein precipitations Cells expressing the tagged versions of the proteins of interest were har- vested by washing with PBS and lysed in modified RIPA buffer [50 mM tris (pH 7.5), 400 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, and 0.1% Na- deoxycholate] supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 2 mM Na-orthovanadate, 5 mM NaF, and 5 mM glycero-2-phosphate. Ly- sates were diluted in modified RIPA without salt and then sonicated and cleared by high-speed centrifugation. GFP immunoprecipitation was per- formed with 20 ml of GFP-Trap_A agarose beads (Chromotek) precipitation was performed using 20 ml of Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads (IBA). One milligram of protein mixtures was incubated with the appropriate beads for 2 hours rotating at 4°C before washing and subsequent elution with 2× Laemmli sample buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 90°C. Immuno- precipitation of methylated proteins was performed similarly but using 20 ml of PTMScan Mono-Methyl Arginine Motif [mme-RG] Immunoaffinity Beads (Cell Signaling) and 5 mg of protein mixtures. RNA binding assay RNA-protein complex isolation was done as previously described (79), with minor changes. In brief, tagged SRSF2 HeLa cells were irradiated with 254 nm of ultraviolet light (0.15 J/cm2) (Dr. Gröbel GmbH), harvested in ice-cold PBS, and spun down. Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer [20 nM tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 500 mM lithium chloride (LiCl), 0.1% Na-deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, and 5 mM DTT] and immediately sonicated for 20 s at an amplitude of 70% (Sonics). Magnetic poly(dT) beads (New England Biolabs) were added to 10 mg of cell lysate and incubated at 4°C for 1 hour with gentle rotation. Beads were captured using a magnetic rack (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and washed once with lysis buffer, followed by washes with the following buffers: (i) 20 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 500 mM LiCl, 0.02% (w/v) Na-deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, and 5 mM DTT; (ii) 20 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 500 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 5 mM DTT; (iii) 20 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 200 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 5 mM DTT. Bound RNA and cross-linked proteins were eluted at 55°C for 3 min in elution buffer [20 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and 1 mM EDTA]. Ribonuclease (RNase) buffer (10×) [100 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1.5 M NaCl, 0.5% (v/v) NP-40, and 5 mM DTT] was added to the sample along with a mixture of RNase A and T1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the sample was incubated for 1 hour at 37°C. After RNase digestion, the eluates were used for Western blot analysis. Western blotting The following antibodies were used in this study: rabbit polyclonal PRMT1 (Cell Signaling), rabbit polyclonal PRMT4 (Cell Signaling), rabbit poly- clonal PRMT5 (Cell Signaling), mouse monoclonal actin (Sigma- Aldrich), rabbit monoclonal GFP (Cell Signaling), mouse monoclonal GFP (Roche), and monoclonal rabbit hnRNPUL1 (Novus Biologicals). Total cell lysates, together with the eluates, were resolved on 4 to 12% gradient SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes (Sigma-Aldrich). Membranes were blocked using 5% bo- vine serum albumin (BSA) solution in PBS supplemented with Tween- 20 (0.1%). Secondary antibodies coupled to horseradish peroxidase (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories) were used for immunodetection. The detection was performed with a Novex ECL Chemiluminescent Sub- strate Reagent Kit (Invitrogen). Quantitative high-content imaging For immunofluorescence analysis, U2OS cells were grown on 96-well screenstar microplates (Greiner Bio One) and fixed in 4% formaldehyde at room temperature for 15 min. Cells were permeabilized for 2 min using 0.2% Triton X-100, blocked in 5% BSA, incubated with mouse monoclonal SC35 (Novus Biologicals) or rabbit polyclonal SRSF5 (Sigma-Aldrich) overnight at 4°C and with secondary antibody Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen) for 1 hour at room temperature, stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for 20 min, and left in PBS. For cell cycle analysis, the Click-iT EdU Alexa Fluor 594 Imaging Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. In brief, cells were treated with EdU for 30 min before fixation and stained for 30 min according to the manufacturer’ s protocol before continuing the immuno- fluorescence staining. QIBC for measurement of fluorescence intensities was performed as described previously (54). For quantitative analysis of CARM1/PRMT4-induced relocalization of SRSF2 and SRSF5 into subnuclear speckles, images were acquired on an Olympus ScanR fully automated widefield microscope, equipped with a light-emitting diode light source, single filters DAPI/fluorescein isothiocyanate/Cy3/Cy5, and a digital monochrome Hamamatsu OrcaFlash 4 camera (2048 × 2048 pixels; cell size, 6.5 mm) with a 20× 0.75 UPLSAPO objective. For each condition, image information of at least 15,000 cells was acquired under nonsaturating conditions. Subnuclear speckles were identified using the inbuilt object recognition features of the ScanR Image Analysis Software. To avoid potential interference from nuclear-cytoplasmic pro- tein shuttling, the count and sum of speckle-associated fluorescence inten- sities normalized by total nuclear fluorescence intensities of SRSF2 served s a measurement for CARM1-induced accumulation of SRSF2 into speckles. The Spotfire software was used to quantify percentages and median values in cell populations and to generate scatter diagrams.

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

