=== TITLE ===
Alterations in the sputum proteome and transcriptome in smokers and early-stage COPD subjects

=== ABSTRACT ===
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the most prevalent lung diseases. Cigarette smoking is the main risk factor for COPD. In this parallel-group clinical study we investigated to what extent the transitions in a chronic-exposure-to-disease model are reflected in the proteome and cellular transcriptome of induced sputum samples. We selected 60 age- and gender-matched individuals for each of the four study groups: current asymptomatic smokers, smokers with early stage COPD, former smokers, and never smokers. The cell-free sputum supernatant was analyzed by quantitative proteomics and the cellular mRNA fraction by gene expression profiling. The sputum proteome of current smokers clearly reflected the common physiological responses to smoke exposure, including alterations in mucin/trefoil proteins and a prominent xenobiotic/oxidative stress response. The latter response also was observed in the transcriptome, which additionally demonstrated an immune-cell polarization change. The former smoker group showed nearly complete attenuation of these biological effects. Thirteen differentially abundant proteins between the COPD and the asymptomatic smoker group were identified including TIMP1, APOA1, C6orf58, and BPIFB1 (LPLUNC1). In summary, our study demonstrates that sputum profiling can capture the complex and reversible physiological response to cigarette smoke exposure, which appears to be only slightly modulated in early-stage COPD.


=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
2.1. Subjects
In this study, we used a parallel-group case-controlled study design to determine changes in the sputum proteome and transcriptome of smokers with COPD, asymptomatic (no COPD) smokers (CS), asymptomatic (no COPD) former smokers (FS), and asymptomatic never smokers (NS). The study was conducted between July 2011 and December 2012 at a single clinical site in London, UK, after approval from the National Health Service (NHS) Black County Ethics Committee and in strict compliance with the International Conference on Harmonisation—Good Clinical Practice (ICH-GCP) guidelines. The study has been registered on ClinicalTrials.gov with identifier NCT01780298.
Male and female subjects aged between 41 and 70 years were enrolled with a completed total subject number of 60 per group. If a subject discontinued participation (for medical or personal reasons), he/she was replaced. During the course of the study, sputum, blood, and nasal samples were collected and a number of physiological and clinical measurements were recorded from a total of 240 subjects. Here, we report on the findings for the sputum proteome and transcriptome. Subjects in each of the three control groups (CS, FS, and NS) were matched to subjects in the COPD group by age (± 5 years), ethnicity, and gender, and all smoking subjects had a smoking history of at least 10 pack-years. For this purpose, a match ID was defined for each paired group of four subjects.
2.2. Sputum collection
Sputum induction was performed at visit 1 (screening), visit 1a (at the discretion of the investigator), and again at visits 2 and 4. At visit 1 (and visit 1a), subjects underwent the sputum induction procedure to confirm that they were able to produce a sputum sample weighing at least 0.1 g; this was an eligibility criterion for the study. Subjects unable to produce an adequate induced sputum sample at visit 2 repeated the procedure at visit 3.
All subjects with a forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) of ≥ 80% predicted and with no respiratory disease performed the sputum induction procedure directly. Subjects with COPD or an FEV1 of ≤ 80% predicted were administered 200 μg of salbutamol by metered dose inhaler. The FEV1 was then assessed 15 min after salbutamol administration and subjects with a highest FEV1 value of ≥ 1.0 L or ≥ 50% predicted could proceed to sputum induction.
Prior to sputum induction, the subject was asked to blow his/her nose. Nasal passages were closed with a soft nose-clip and the subject instructed to inhale 3% hypertonic sodium chloride solution over 5 min. After inhalation or if able to expectorate before 5 min had passed, the subject was asked to blow his/her nose, gargle, and rinse their mouth using room temperature water. The subject was then instructed to cough up sputum, which was collected in a pre-labeled cup. Where possible the subject was to complete three cycles of sputum expectoration using 3%, 4%, and 5% hypertonic sodium chloride. Sputum from all three cycles was collected in the same cup. If a subject's FEV1 fell ≥ 20% of the best post-bronchodilator baseline value or if significant symptoms were seen, sputum induction was stopped and the subject given bronchodilator therapy as needed. Sputum samples were placed on ice and processed within 2 h. Sputum plugs were selected and solubilized in DTT, and the cell phase was collected cytometry and transcriptomics evaluation by centrifugation while the supernatant was collected in separate cryovials and stored at − 80 °C until subsequent proteomic analysis.
2.3. Proteomics analysis
Sputum samples from all 240 study subjects were processed in random order. A reference sample was included by mixing equal protein amounts of all 240 samples. Proteins were extracted by acetone precipitation and desalted, followed by trypsin digestion. The tryptic peptides were labeled using Tandem Mass Tag™ 6-plex (TMTsixplex™) reagents (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and one labeled sample each representing the four study groups plus the reference sample were mixed in equal protein amounts. The paired subjects in each TMT set were matched to the COPD sample by age, ethnicity, and gender (and a match ID was assigned to each set). These labeled mixes were then purified to remove unincorporated TMT™ reagents and subsequently analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass-spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) using an EASY-nanoLC 1000 instrument connected online to a Q Exactive™ mass-analyzer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were fractionated on a 50 cm C18RP RSLC EASY-spray™ column (2 μm particle size; Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min with a 200 min gradient from nanoLC buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) to 40% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. Each sample set was analyzed in duplicate in fast and sensitive analysis mode as described previously [28]. LC–MS/MS data from both injections were merged and compared against the human reference proteome in the UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org/, version January 2014). Proteome Discoverer™ 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) was used for the database searches with the SEQUEST™ HT and Mascot® 2.4 search algorithms. The Percolator node of Proteome Discoverer™ was used to estimate peptide-level adjusted p-values (q-values), and the peptides were filtered for a q-value < 0.05 (i.e., the false discovery rate (FDR) was controlled at the 5% level). The quantification of TMT™ reporter ions and the peptide-to-protein (group) assignments was performed with Proteome Discoverer™. TMT™ peptide-level data were exported and further processed in the R statistical environment [29]. Quantitative data were filtered for “unique” quantitative results; e.g., by removing redundant results from multiple search engines. To improve data quality, multiplexed sample runs with median log parent intensity below the 25%ile–1.5 IQR (interquartile range) or above the 75%ile + 1.5 IQR were classified as outliers. With this, 216 out of 240 samples were retained for the subsequent analysis (54 of each group). Global variance stabilizing normalization was performed [30], [31]. Each TMT™ reporter ion set was normalized to its median, and protein expression values were calculated as the median of these normalized peptide-level quantitation values [32]. Only proteins quantified for at least 2/3 of the samples of each study group were considered for differential abundance analysis. The four subject groups (NS, CS, FS, and COPD) enabled six pairwise comparisons, for which the statistics of differential protein expressions were calculated using the limma package [33]. For each comparison, a linear model was fitted to the expression data of the two considered subject groups only, which further included a covariate variable (match ID) taking into account the 60 subject strata defined in the study design. The Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) FDR method was used to correct for multiple testing effects [33]. Proteins with BH-adjusted p-values < 0.05 were considered as significantly differentially abundant. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium [34] via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD001977. Note that the data for the full set of 240 samples is provided and the 216 samples considered for the analysis presented here are indicated in the “Comments [IncludedForAnalysis]” column in the sample annotation file.
2.4. Generation of transcriptomics data
RNA was extracted and processed by AROS Applied Biotechnology A/S (Aarhus, Denmark) and hybridized to Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Arrays according to standard operating procedures. 192 out of 240 microarrays (CEL files) passed initial QC criteria and were subjected to further data analysis in the R statistical environment [29]. Raw RNA expression data were first preprocessed using the affy and gcrma packages of the Bioconductor suite of microarray analysis tools [33], [35], [36]. GeneChip Robust Multiarray Average (GCRMA) background correction and quantile normalization were used to generate probe set-level expression values [37]. Quality controls were then iteratively performed using the arrayQualityMetrics package [38] to retain 179 valid arrays. As for the proteomics analysis, the four subject groups (NS, CS, FS, and COPD) enabled six pairwise comparisons, for which the statistics of probe set-level differential expressions were calculated using the limma package [33]. For each comparison, a linear model was fitted to the expression data of the two considered subject groups only, which further included a covariate variable (match ID) taking into account the 60 subject strata defined in the study design. Probe set-level results were attributed to the 23.414 HGNC gene symbols underlying our network collection (see below) using the best probe set-gene symbol annotation determined by the overall lowest p-values in the six pairwise comparisons. Raw p-values were then adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure [33]. Microarray data were submitted to ArrayExpress with the accession number E-MTAB-3604.
2.5. Identification of functional clusters
Functional association networks were derived for the differentially abundant proteins or genes and functional association clusters were identified to guide functional interpretation. The functional associations between genes or proteins were obtained from the STRING database (version 9.1) [39]. To identify functional protein clusters associated with the current smoking status, functional associations with at least medium confidence (score > 0.4) between the differentially up- (or down-) regulated proteins in all smoker vs. non-smoker comparisons (CS vs. NS, COPD vs. NS, CS vs. FS, COPD vs. FS) were extracted and clusters were identified using an information theoretic approach for community identification [40]. Functional annotation of the clusters was guided by enrichment analysis with the TOPPGene tool [41]. To allow for summarization of the transcriptomics data with a larger number of differentially expressed mRNAs as a concise and interpretable association network, we used the dnet approach [42]. With this, a concise gene association network of about 100 nodes with maximized overall differential expression for CS vs. NS was identified. Cluster identification and annotation was performed as for the proteomics data. Network analysis and visualization was supported by the igraph package in R [43], [44].
2.6. Network analysis for transcriptomics data
In order to interpret the transcriptomics results, we also applied a systems biology approach called “Network Perturbation Amplitude” (NPA), which uses the differential expression of predefined sets of genes (transcriptional layer) to deduce the changes in the activities of the upstream biological mechanisms that collectively affect these genes (functional layer) [45], [46]. These mechanisms have been assembled as so called backbone nodes into causal network models describing specific processes such as cellular stress and inflammatory responses [47], [48]. One advantage of the NPA approach is that the calculated perturbation amplitudes can be quantitatively contrasted across multiple pairwise comparisons, very much like gene differential expression, but at a higher level of the systems organization (backbone node or even full network instead of single genes).
Because sputum samples contain multiple cell types (mostly macrophages and neutrophils) and because the relative proportions of these multiple cell types can vary between the four subject groups (NS, CS, FS, and COPD), care is needed when interpreting the changes in the sputum cellular transcriptomes. In particular, this is of concern when applying the cell type-specific inflammatory network models [47], which implicitly assume that the changes in the cellular mRNA can be attributed to the differential regulation within one cell type. Thus, we calculated the NPA values at the level of the individual backbone nodes in a network model-independent manner by applying the so called strength metric. Comparing these NPA results and gene expression changes for our study with published datasets on the gene expression response of macrophages (see below) enabled us to determine which cell type-specific inflammatory network models were applicable for a given pairwise comparison. The appropriate models were then used to identify biological processes that likely caused the changes observed in the sputum transcriptomes.
The public gene expression datasets (Supplementary Table S3) were downloaded from the Gene Omnibus (GEO) database and preprocessed as described above for our data. The downstream genes (i.e., the transcriptional layer) that are connected to the backbone nodes of the cellular stress and inflammation network models used in the NPA calculations were extracted from the Selventa Knowledgebase, which is a comprehensive repository containing over 1.5 million nodes and over 7.5 million edges [45]. The Selventa Knowledgebase is derived from peer-reviewed scientific literature as well as other public and proprietary databases — a part of which is publicly available through the openBEL portal [www.openbel.org]. The GSEA calculations were run on a local installation of the analysis software [49].
2.7. Identification of discriminant predictive proteins
A discriminant set of proteins for a given comparison (e.g., CS vs. NS) were derived either by logistic lasso regression [50] or by linear discriminant analysis (LDA) with a forward selection procedure [51]. The forward selection is aiming at first finding the most discriminant protein (by leave-one-out cross-validation) by testing all the available ones using LDA, then subsequently test for the second best (together with the first selected one) and so on, until having included N proteins, where N is specified by the user based on the expected complexity of the model. The regularization parameter for the logistic lasso regression was selected by 10-fold cross-validation. The performance of each procedure was evaluated by k-fold cross validation, repeated L times where k = 10 and L = 5.


=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

