=== TITLE ===
Deep Quantitative Proteomics Reveals Extensive Metabolic Reprogramming and Cancer-Like Changes of Ectopic Endometriotic Stromal Cells

=== ABSTRACT ===
Endometriosis is a prevalent health condition in women of reproductive age characterized by ectopic growth of endometrial-like tissue in the extrauterine environment. Thorough understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the disease is still incomplete. We dissected eutopic and ectopic endometrial primary stromal cell proteomes to a depth of nearly 6900 proteins using quantitative mass spectrometry with a spike-in SILAC standard. Acquired data revealed metabolic reprogramming of ectopic stromal cells with extensive upregulation of glycolysis and downregulation of oxidative respiration, a widespread metabolic phenotype known as the Warburg eﬀect and previously described in many cancers. These changes in metabolism are additionally accompanied by attenuated aerobic respiration of ectopic endometrial stromal cells as measured by live-cell oximetry and by altered mRNA levels of respective enzyme complexes. Our results additionally highlight other molecular changes of ectopic endometriotic stromal cells indicating reduced apoptotic potential, increased cellular invasiveness and adhesiveness, and altered immune function. Altogether, these comprehensive proteomics data refine the current understanding of endometriosis pathogenesis and present new avenues for therapies.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Ethics Statement and Sample Collection  The study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the University of Tartu, and informed written consent was obtained from the participants. Altogether, six (n = 6) healthy controls and 13 (n = 13) endometriosis patients were enrolled for the study. Endometrial tissue samples and peritoneal endometriotic lesions were collected from endometriosis patients undergoing laparoscopy at the Tartu University Hospital Women’s Clinic. The diagnosis was histologically confirmed, and disease severity was determined according to the American Society for Reproductive Medicine revised classification system. (11) The EM biopsies of controls were collected under local anesthesia. The control group consisted of self-reported healthy and fertile women having at least one child and recruited via public advertisement. A questionnaire was administered to all participants to obtain thorough information regarding the general and reproductive health characteristics, including menstrual cycle anamnesis, use of medications, presence of systemic diseases, and other health conditions. All biopsy samples were collected using an EM suction catheter (Pipelle, Laboratoire CCD). All study participants were of reproductive age, had received no hormonal medication during the 3 months before the recruitment, and had regular menstrual cycle (28 ± 5 days). Self-reported menstrual cycle day was used to estimate cycle phase, and all biopsies were collected in the secretory phase. The demographic and clinical data of the study participants are summarized in Table S1. Endometrial Stromal Cell Isolation  Endometrial tissue and lesions were immediately placed in an ice-cold 1:1 mixture of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) and Ham’s F-12 for transport to the laboratory. The tissue was washed in 7 mL of fresh medium to remove any debris or excess blood cells. The biopsies were dissociated in 5 mL of DMEM medium without phenol red containing 0.5% collagenase (Sigma-Aldrich) in shaking incubator rotating at 110 rpm at 37 °C until the biopsies were digested but not longer than 1 h. The dispersed cells were filtered through a 50 μm nylon mesh to remove undigested tissue pieces. Stromal cell isolation was carried out as previously described. (12) In brief, the cells were resuspended in 10 mL of culture medium in a 15 mL tube. Sealed tubes were placed in an upright position for 10 min to sediment epithelial glands. The top 8 mL of medium containing stromal cells was collected and the epithelial cells on the bottom were discarded. The sedimentation process was repeated three times. Final purification of stromal cells was achieved by selective adherence of stromal cells to culture dishes for 30 min at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Nonadhering epithelial cells were discarded by washing twice in 5 mL of culture medium. Cell Culture and Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino Acids in Cell Culture  Isolated ESCs were cultured for 2–5 passages in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) with penicillin/streptomycin/amphotericin B (100 U/mL, 100 μg/mL, and 0.25 μg/mL, respectively) at 37 °C and under 5% CO2. For subsequent comparative analyses passage number of samples across groups was matched. Confluent cells were dissociated with 0.25% trypsin-EDTA (Gibco) and collected by centrifugation at 200g for 6 min, followed by two washes with 2 mL of PBS each. Cell pellets were kept at −80 °C until further analysis. For the production of the stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) standard, secretory phase ESCs from a healthy endometrium and Ishikawa cancer cells were separately cultured for six passages in DMEM supplemented with 0.266 mM heavy (13C615N2) lysine (Lys8) and 0.133 mM heavy (13C615N4) arginine (Arg10) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and 10% dialyzed FBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 200 mg/L light proline was also added to the labeling medium to suppress potential arginine to proline interconversion. (13) Ishikawa cancer cells were included as a standard to provide more optimal quantification of proteins important in proliferative capacity. Nano-LC–MS/MS Sample Preparation  For proteomics analyses we used primary cultures of stromal cells from endometrium of healthy controls (n = 6), stromal cells from endometrium of endometriosis patients (n = 5), and stromal cells from peritoneal lesions (n = 5). Cell pellets were lysed and prepared essentially as described by Erde et al. (14) with minor modifications. In brief, the cells were lysed in 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 10 mM DTT with incubation at 95 °C for 5 min, followed by probe sonication (20× 1 s pulses). After protein concentration measurements in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 using tryptophan fluorescence (excitation/emission wavelengths of 295/350 nm, respectively) the samples were spiked 1:1 with the SILAC standard. The standard consisted of 2:1 mixture of healthy secretory phase ESCs and Ishikawa cancer cells labeled with heavy lysine and arginine. The mixtures were on-filter (30 kDa molecular weight cutoff; Millipore) digested with 1:50 proteomics grade dimethylated porcine trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) and in the presence of 1.0% sodium deoxycholate. After phase-transfer removal of the detergent with ethyl acetate the samples were fractionated into six fractions using strong cation exchange (SCX) and C18 StageTips. (15) Peptides were eluted, dried, and reconstituted in 0.5% TFA. Nano-LC–MS/MS Analysis  SCX peptide fractions were separated on Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) using a C18 cartridge trap-column (Dionex) in backflush configuration and an in-house packed (3 μm C18 particles, Dr Maisch) analytical 50 cm × 75 μm emitter-column (New Objective). Peptides were eluted at 200 nL/min with a 8–40% B 240 min gradient (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, buffer B: 80% acetonitrile +0.1% formic acid) to a Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) tandem mass spectrometer operating with a top-15 strategy and a cycle time of 1.2 s. In brief, one 350–1400 m/z MS scan at a resolution of R = 70 000 was followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation (normalized collision energy of 27) of up to the 15 most intense ions (charge states +2 to +6) at R = 17 500. MS and MS/MS ion target values were set to 3e6 and 5e4, respectively, and fragmented ions were dynamically excluded for 80 s. Mass-Spectrometric Raw Data Processing  Raw data were identified and quantified with MaxQuant 1.4.0.8 software package. (16) Labeling state (multiplicity) was set to 2 and Lys8 and Arg10 were defined as the heavy amino acids. Methionine oxidation, asparagine/glutamine deamidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Search was performed with the MaxQuant Andromeda search engine against UniProtKB (www.uniprot.org) human reference proteome database (September 1, 2014) using the trypsin digestion rule (cleavage after lysine and arginine without proline restriction). First and main search MS mass tolerances were ≤20 and ≤4.5 ppm, respectively. MS/MS tolerance was ≤20 ppm. Only protein identifications with minimally one (n ≥ 1) peptide of at least seven (n ≥ 7) amino acids long were accepted, and transfer of identifications between runs was enabled. For protein quantification minimally two ratio (n ≥ 2) measurements were required with at least three (n ≥ 3) points across a chromatographic peak. Signal integration of missing label channels (requantification) was allowed. Peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate was kept below 1% (FDR ≤ 1%) using a target-decoy approach. All other parameters were set to default. The mass spectrometry raw files along with MaxQuant identification and quantification output (txt folder) have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (17) via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD002845. Statistical and Enrichment Analysis of Proteomics Data  Statistical analysis was performed using MaxQuant Perseus module and Microsoft Excel’s Real Statistics Resource Pack. To account for mixing errors, protein H/L ratios were normalized by shifting median log H/L ratio to 0. After inverting and log transformation of the ratio data, only proteins with at least three quantitative measurements per sample group were retained. Histograms were plotted for measured ratios and checked for conformity with the normal distribution. To detect significantly changed proteins, we conducted one-way analysis of variance (one-way ANOVA) along with multiple testing correction using the Benjamini and Hochberg’s FDR procedure below 0.05 (FDR ≤ 5%) level. Tukey–Kramer’s method was applied for posthoc comparisons and significance was reported for proteins with a posthoc comparison p value of <0.05. Term enrichment analysis using significantly up- or downregulated gene lists was performed with Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) bioinformatics resources. (18) UniProtKB identifiers were used as the search input. Enrichment cutoff was set at an EASE score of 0.1 and enrichment background was the human genome. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Pathway and Gene Ontology Biological process (GOBP) terms having a q value ≤0.1 were considered for interpretation. Quantitative Real-Time PCR (qRT-PCR) Validation of Proteomics Results  Total RNA was extracted from eutopic (n = 5) and ectopic (n = 5) endometriotic primary ESCs using RNeasy MinElute Cleanup kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. DNase-treated (TURBO DNA-free kit, Ambion) RNA was converted into cDNA using RevertAid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) was performed using 5 × HOT FIREPol EvaGreen qPCR Mix Plus (ROX) master mix (Solis BioDyne) according to conditions specified by the manufacturer in 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems). Primer sequences used for analysis of cytochrome c oxidase subunit 6C (COX6C), cytochrome b-c1 complex subunit 1, mitochondrial (UQCRC1), cytochrome b-c1 complex subunit 2, mitochondrial (UQCRC2), NADH dehydrogenase [ubiquinone] 1 beta subcomplex subunit 6 (NDUFB6), ATP synthase subunit d, mitochondrial (ATP5H), phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (PGK1), alpha-enolase (ENO1), ATP-dependent 6-phosphofructokinase, platelet type (PFKP), ATP-dependent 6-phosphofructokinase, liver type (PFKL), and hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha (HIF1A) are given in Table S2. Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT1) was used as endogenous control. Normalized mRNA expression level differences between the samples were analyzed using a paired t test, and p < 0.05 was considered as a statistically significant difference. The 2–ΔΔCt method (19) was used for calculating the relative expression and to determine the fold change (FC) of mRNA expression between eutopic and ectopic stromal cells of endometriosis patients. Respirometric Analysis of Endometrial Stromal Cell Aerobic Metabolic Activity  The cellular routine respiration, reflecting the aerobic metabolic activity under routine culture conditions (with the physiological substrates in culture medium), was recorded by high-resolution respirometry (Oroboros Instruments) with a Clark electrode at 37 °C. Roughly 1 × 106 cells from paired endometriotic euESC (n = 5) and ecESC (n = 5) primary cultures were transferred into each respiratory chamber of the oxygraph. After observing steady-state respiratory flux (routine respiration, Vr), the ATP synthase was inhibited with 2 μg/mL oligomycin (VOly), followed by uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation by stepwise titration of carbonyl cyanide p-trifluoromethoxyphenylhydrazone (FCCP, inducing artificial proton leakage) up to optimum concentrations in the range of 2–10 μM (VFCCPmax). Finally, respiration was inhibited and measured in the presence of rotenone (Rot, inhibiting complex I activity) at 2.5 μM (VRot) and then antimycin A (AntA; inhibiting complex III) at 2.5 μM (VAntA). The slopes of O2 consumption were calculated with DatLab 4.0 (Oroboros). Respiration due to oxidative phosphorylation was calculated by subtracting O2 consumption with oligomycin from routine O2 consumption (Vr – VOly). Contribution of proton leakage across mitochondrial inner membrane was derived by subtracting respiration with oligomycin from that with antimycin A (VOly – VAntA). Maximal capacity of the respiratory chain was calculated by the subtraction of respiration with FCCP from that with AntA (VFCCP – VAntA). Metabolic Enzyme Assays  Endometriotic euESC (n = 4) and ecESC (n = 4) cell pellets were resuspended with the homogenization solution (1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10 mM glucose, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM HEPES pH 8, 0.1% Triton X-100, and 5 μg/mL leupeptin) and incubated 15 min with shaking. All assays were performed at 25 °C. For creatine kinase (CK) activity the homogenates were incubated in solution containing 20 mM glucose, 20 mM AMP, 0.3 mM DTT, 3 mM Mg-acetate, 1 mM MgADP, 1 mM NADP, and 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, supplemented with 2 IU/mL hexokinase and 2 IU/mL glucose-6-phosophate dehydrogenase at 25 °C. After stabilization of the optical density, the reaction was started by the addition of 20 mM phosphocreatine and the rate of NADPH formation was registered. Adenylate kinase (AK) activity was measured spectrophotometrically at 340 nm by rate of decrease of 0.24 mM NADH. The assay solution contained 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 15 mM KCl, 0.33 mM DTT, 0.8 mM phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), 1 mM ATP, 3 IU/mL lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and 6 IU/mL pyruvate kinase (PK). Measurement of citrate synthase (CS) activity was performed by using Citrate Synthase Assay Kit (Sigma-Aldrich). Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford reactive (Quick Start Protein Assay, Bio-Rad).

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

