=== TITLE ===
Xilmass: A New Approach toward the Identification of Cross-Linked Peptides.

=== ABSTRACT ===
Chemical cross-linking coupled with mass spectrometry plays an important role in unravelling protein interactions, especially weak and transient ones. Moreover, cross-linking complements several structural determination approaches such as cryo-EM. Although several computational approaches are available for the annotation of spectra obtained from cross-linked peptides, there remains room for improvement. Here, we present Xilmass, a novel algorithm to identify cross-linked peptides that introduces two new concepts: (i) the cross-linked peptides are represented in the search database such that the cross-linking sites are explicitly encoded, and (ii) the scoring function derived from the Andromeda algorithm was adapted to score against a theoretical tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectrum that contains the peaks from all possible fragment ions of a cross-linked peptide pair. The performance of Xilmass was evaluated against the recently published Kojak and the popular pLink algorithms on a calmodulin-plectin complex data set, as well as three additional, published data sets. The results show that Xilmass typically had the highest number of identified distinct cross-linked sites and also the highest number of predicted cross-linked sites.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Sample Preparation
Human CaM and plectin-ABD isoform 1a, expressed and purified as described, (40) were kindly provided by Kristina Dijnović-Carugo and Jae-Geun Song (Vienna, Austria). The protein complex was cross-linked by isotopically light (nonlabeled) and heavy (labeled) disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS-d0 and DSS-d12), subsequently digested with trypsin and analyzed by LC–MS/MS using fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). A detailed description of sample preparation and MS analysis is given in section S1 in the Supporting Information.
Search Settings
The raw data were converted with msconvert (part of ProteoWizard release 3.0.7692) (41) to mgf for both Xilmass and pLink and to mzML (42) for Kojak.
A database that contains the two target proteins and their reversed sequences (decoy) was prepared by DBToolKit (43) (version 4.2.4). The decoy sequences were later used to compute FDR. (44)In silico digestion was performed, and a cross-linked peptide database was built for each possible peptide-pair combination (see section S2.2 in the Supporting Information). This resulted in 27 414 possible cross-linked peptides from the four proteins: the two target proteins and their reversed sequences, without considering any modification.
The database search settings were carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The fragmentation mode was set to HCD, with the precursor and the fragment mass tolerances set at 15 ppm and 0.03 Da, respectively. Subsequently four isotopic precursor mass tolerance windows at 10 ppm were allowed. See section S2.2 in the Supporting Information for the parameters to run Xilmass, Kojak (24) (version 1.3.6), and pLink (22) (version date January 27, 2015). The XPSMs identified by Xilmass were validated by the built-in FDR specific for cross-linked peptides; Kojak identifications were validated with Percolator (45) (version 2.07); and the validated XPSMs for pLink were obtained straight from pLink. The performance of the algorithms was compared for the validated XPSMs at 5% FDR. These validated XPSM lists were then inspected for the occurrence of common contaminants (see section S3 in the Supporting Information), and any contaminant-derived spectrum was removed.
Verification of the Identified Cross-Linking Sites
Identified cross-linking sites were further verified with the aid of known structures: the PDB-entry of 4Q57 (40) contains the actin-binding domain (ABD) of plectin in complex with the N-terminal domain of calmodulin, and the PDB-entry of 2F3Y (46) contains calmodulin (complexed with a subunit of the voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel, which was not of interest in this work). The maximum allowed DSS distance constraint was Euclidean Cα–Cα distance of 30 Å. (19, 47) The identified sites were visualized in PyMOL (The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, version 1.1r1, Schrödinger, LLC) and compared against the predicted sites. Xwalk (version v0.6), an algorithm that predicts XL sites by the computation of the solvent accessible surface distance (SASD), (48) was run in the production mode allowing a SASD of 34 Å, which is the default Xwalk value for lysine to lysine XL sites with DSS as cross-linker. The prediction mode was set to both intra- and interprotein XL sites for 4Q57 and only the intraprotein XL sites of calmodulin for 2F3Y. In total 86 XL sites were predicted.
Xilmass: an Algorithm to Identify Cross-Linked Peptides
Xilmass is designed to identify cross-linked peptides, irrespective of the labeling strategy. Xilmass is implemented in Java and Apache-Lucene (https://lucene.apache.org/) is used for database indexing. The algorithm is inherently multithreaded for the XPSM score calculations. Xilmass is open-source and freely available under the permissive Apache2 license and works on Windows, Linux, and OS-X operating systems. Xilmass is available both as a graphical user interface (GUI) tool but can also be ran on the command-line. The Xilmass software and its source code can be downloaded from https://github.com/compomics/xilmass.git, and documentation is also available on this site.
Data Availability
The data set and the cross-linked peptides database are available in ProteomeXchange (49) through PRIDE, (50) under accession number PXD003880.

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

