=== TITLE ===
Proteome Analysis of Rheumatoid Arthritis Gut Mucosa.

=== ABSTRACT ===
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an inflammatory joint disease leading to cartilage damage and ultimately impaired joint function. To gain new insight into the systemic immune manifestations of RA, we characterized the colon mucosa proteome from 11 RA-patients and 10 healthy controls. The biopsies were extracted by colonoscopy and analyzed by label-free quantitative proteomics, enabling the quantitation of 5366 proteins. The abundance of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) was statistically significantly increased in RA-patient biopsies compared with controls and correlated with the administered dosage of methotrexate (MTX), the most frequently prescribed immunosuppressive drug for RA. Additionally, our data suggest that treatment with Leflunomide, a common alternative to MTX, increases DHFR. The findings were supported by immunohistochemistry with confocal microscopy, which furthermore demonstrated that DHFR was located in the cytosol of the intestinal epithelial and interstitial cells. Finally, we identified 223 citrullinated peptides from 121 proteins. Three of the peptides were unique to RA. The list of citrullinated proteins was enriched in extracellular and membrane proteins and included known targets of anticitrullinated protein antibodies (ACPAs). Our findings support that the colon mucosa could trigger the production of ACPAs, which could contribute to the onset of RA. The MS data have been deposited to ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD001608 and PXD003082. 

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Collection of Colon Mucosa Biopsies At The Diagnostic Center, Regional Hospital Silkeborg, Denmark, 11 RA-patients without known gastrointestinal disease and 10 healthy controls were recruited in the period from 2012 to 2013 for the project. Oral and written informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to participation in the study, and the project was approved by The Regional Scientific Ethical Committee (S-20120204) and the Danish Data Protection Agency (2008-58-035). Colon mucosa biopsies were sampled 40 cm from the anus by sigmoidoscopy, and diagnosis, medication (Table 1), and prognostic data (Table 2) were recorded from the patient records. Biopsies for mass spectrometry (MS) were immediately transferred to cryotubes and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, followed by storage at −80 °C until proteomics sample preparation. Biopsies for immunohistochemistry were immediately placed on mixed cellulose ester filters (Advantec, Tokyo, Japan), fixed in phosphate-buffered 4% formaldehyde, and stored at room temperature for 24 h before paraffin embedding according to standard pathology procedures. The biopsies were obtained and processed in parallel with a study of ulcerative colitis, and the control samples were used in both studies.19 Sample Preparation/Digestion The biopsies were prepared using a filter-aided sample preparation protein digestion protocol.20−23 Briefly explained, the biopsies were homogenized in 0.5 mL of cold lysis buffer (5% sodium deoxycholate, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5). The protein concentrations of the lysates were estimated by measuring absorbance at 280 nm (A280) using a NanoDrop 1000 UV−vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). A lysate volume corresponding to 100 μg solubilized protein was transferred to a 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff spin-filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA), and protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)- phosphine (Thermo Scientific) for 30 min. Cysteine residues were blocked with 50 mM 2-iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) in lysis buffer for 30 min in the dark. Protein digestion was performed with sequencing-grade-modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) diluted in digestion buffer (0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) at a nominal enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w). After overnight digestion at 37 °C, the peptide material was eluted from the spin filter with digestion buffer and acidified with formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 1%. The peptide material was purified by phase inversions with ethyl acetate 1:2 (v/v), and the peptide-rich aqueous phase was dried down in a vacuum centrifuge. LC−MS/MS Sample Analysis UPLC−MS/MS analysis was performed using an UltiMate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). All biopsies were analyzed in triplicate and in a random order.24 Peptide material (5 μg as determined by A280) was separated on a 50 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap100 analytical column (Thermo Scientific) with 96% solvent A (0.1% FA) and 4% solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile), which was increased to 30% solvent B on a 230 min ramp gradient at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. Eluting peptides were introduced directly into the mass spectrometer by a picotip emitter for electrospray ionization (New Objective, Woburn, MA). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode using a data-dependent TOP12 acquisition method with the following settings: mass range m/z 400−1200; MS1-scan resolution 70 000 @ m/z 200; MS2-scan resolution 17 500 @ m/z 200; isolation window m/z 1.6; NCE 27; charge state exclusion: unassigned, 1, >6; peptide match preferred; dynamic exclusion 30 s. Protein Quantification and Filtering The .RAW files were searched with MaxQuant v1.5.2.8 against the UniProt Homo sapiens reference proteome database with isoforms (UP000005640, last modified 2015-01-16, entry count 90 434).25,26 Standard settings were employed in MaxQuant, including max two tryptic missed cleavages, and a first search with 20 ppm mass tolerance followed by data calibration and a main search with 4.5 ppm mass tolerance. The match between runs feature was enabled to allow the transfer of identified precursors between different runs, based on accurate mass and retention time. The following peptide modifications were found to be abundant with the applied protocol and were included in the search: carbamidomethylated cysteine residues (fixed), acetylation of the N-terminal of proteins (variable), oxidation of methionine (variable), deamidation of asparginine and glutamine residues (variable), and arginine citrullination (variable).27,28 Identified proteins and peptide spectral matches were filtered to <1% false discovery rate (FDR) using a forward/reverse database search strategy in MaxQuant, and proteins tagged as common contaminants were removed.29 Relative protein quantities were calculated by summing the unique peptide peak areas of each protein in MaxQuant using the LFQ (label-free quantitation) feature. Additional filtering steps were employed in Perseus v1.5.0.31 for quantifiable proteins: (1) The quantitation of any protein was required to be based on at least two sequence-unique quantifiable peptides. (2) The sequence-unique peptides were required to be quantifiable in at least five of the RA biopsies or control biopsies. (3) Pearson’s correlation coefficients (R) between the technical repeats should be >0.95, based on log2-transformed protein LFQ values (one replicate of three from RA_9 and RA_8 was removed). Citrullinated peptides were identified using a previous published strategy.30 We further filtered on the 1% FDR individual peptide level from the MaxQuant file modificationSpecificPeptides.txt. We required a tryptic arginine missed cleavage and no other modification present other than citrullination, with a citrullination localization probability >0.95 assigned by MaxQuant. Additionally, no transfer of MS2 information was allowed to avoid mismatching with the isobaric deamidation (NQ). Finally, the peptide should fulfill protein quantitation requirement (2), and hence a citrullinated peptide ID would be based on at least five peptide spectral matches (all passing 1% FDR and >0.95 localization probability) from different RA or control samples. Data Processing All LC−MS run abundances were log2-transformed, and the triplicate measurements of each biopsies were combined biopsy-wise by the median. Proteins and citrullinated peptides with a statistically significant mean abundance difference between the RA and control biopsies were identified by independent two-sample t tests in Perseus, with permutationbased truncation using standard parameters (s0 = 1 and 250 randomizations) to correct for multiple hypothesis testing.31−33 In this way, the p-value requirement was adjusted to expect <5% false-positives among the statistically significant findings.34,35 Correlation analysis between protein abundances and medical diagnostic information was done in SPSS statistics v23 (IBM, Armonk, NY), and boxplots were created using BoxPlotR.36−38 The MS data has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral. proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with data set identifiers PXD001608 and PXD003082.39,40 Immunohistochemistry The formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded biopsies were sliced into 5 μm sections, mounted on microscope slides, deparaffinized with tissue clear (Sakura, AJ Alphen aan den Rijn, The Netherlands), and washed with ethanol, water, and phosphatebuffered saline (PBS). The sections were blocked with 0.1% BSA in PBS and incubated with 1 μg/mL mouse monoclonal antibody DHFR antibody (C-4) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) in PBS with 0.1% BSA. The slides were then incubated with the secondary antibody, Rhodamine (TRITC)- conjugated affinity-purified goat antimouse IgG (H+L) (min X Hu, Bov, Hrs Sr Prot) (Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA) diluted 1:200 in PBS with BSA. The slides were washed with PBS, and the DNA was stained by incubating the slides with 2 μM TO-PRO3 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) in PBS. A negative control was performed by staining biopsies with Mab32.3 against Chlamydia trachomatis major outer membrane protein.41 The sections were investigated with a SP5 confocal microscope (Leica Camera, Solms, Germany) with PL Floutar 16×/0.5, HCX PL APO 63×/1.40, and HCX PL APO 100×/ 1.47 objectives. The laser energy and photon multiplier tube gain were kept constant. Using ImageJ upgraded with the LOCI’s Bio-Formats plugin, the DHFR signal intensity was summed for each confocal image.42,43 The log2-transformed summed intensity was used as a representation of the DHFR abundance.

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

