=== TITLE ===
Site-specific mapping of the human SUMO proteome reveals co-modification with phosphorylation

=== ABSTRACT ===
A comprehensive analysis of the human SUMO proteome, in HeLa and U2OS cell lines and under different conditions, identifies new SUMOylated sites and reveals cross-talk between SUMO and other post-translational modifications, such as phosphorylation. Small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMOs) are post-translational modifications (PTMs) that regulate nuclear cellular processes. Here we used an augmented K0–SUMO proteomics strategy to identify 40,765 SUMO acceptor sites and quantify their fractional contribution for 6,747 human proteins. Structural–predictive analyses revealed that lysines residing in disordered regions are preferentially targeted by SUMO, in notable contrast to other widespread lysine modifications. In our data set, we identified 807 SUMOylated peptides that were co-modified by phosphorylation, along with dozens of SUMOylated peptides that were co-modified by ubiquitylation, acetylation and methylation. Notably, 9% of the identified SUMOylome occurred proximal to phosphorylation, and numerous SUMOylation sites were found to be fully dependent on prior phosphorylation events. SUMO-proximal phosphorylation occurred primarily in a proline-directed manner, and inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinases dynamically affected co-modification. Collectively, we present a comprehensive analysis of the SUMOylated proteome, uncovering the structural preferences for SUMO and providing system-wide evidence for a remarkable degree of cross-talk between SUMOylation and other major PTMs.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Cell culture.
HeLa and U2OS cell lines stably expressing K0-SUMO (His10-SUMO2-8KR-Q87R-IRES-GFP) were described in previous work1,27. Cells were routinely tested for mycoplasma contamination. Cells were cultured at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) with high glucose and GlutaMAX (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For heat-shock experiments, cells were incubated at 43 °C for 1 h. For proteasome inhibition by MG132 (N-benzyloxycarbonyl-L-leucyl-L-leucyl-L-leucinal; Sigma), cells were incubated for 8 h after the addition of MG132 to a concentration of 10 μM. For proteasome inhibition by bortezomib (Cell Signaling Technology), cells were incubated for 24 h after the addition of bortezomib to a concentration of 100 nM. Four replicates of K0-SUMO-expressing HeLa and U2OS cell lines were cultured under standard growth conditions or were subjected to all three proteotoxic treatments. For CDK inhibition, cells were incubated for 2 h after addition of Cdk1/2 Inhibitor III (Millipore) to a concentration of 10 μM. An additional quadruplicate of control cells was prepared for comparison with the CDKi-treated cells. For each of the 48 experimental replicates, ∼200 million cells were cultured, from which SUMOylated peptides were subsequently purified. For MS analysis, material purified from ∼40 million cells was analyzed in each single-shot run, and material purified from ∼80 million cells was analyzed as six fractions.

Purification of SUMOylated proteins.
Biochemical purification of SUMOylated proteins was performed essentially as described previously1,30. Briefly, cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and subsequently collected by gentle scraping in a cold room (4 °C). Cells were pelleted by a brief period of centrifugation, washed once with ice-cold PBS and pelleted again. Cell pellets were lysed directly in ten pellet volumes of room temperature lysis buffer (6 M guanidine, 100 mM Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 10 mM Tris, pH 7.9), through vigorous vortexing alternated with vigorous shaking. Lysates were immediately snap frozen using liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C until further processing.

Lysates were allowed to thaw by rotating the tubes at room temperature. After thawing, lysates were homogenized using a microtip sonicator, using 10-s pulses of 30-W power output. Two pulses were used per 10 ml of lysate, using a maximum of 30 ml of lysate in 50-ml tubes. Homogenized lysates were supplemented with 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol (βME) and 50 mM imidazole (from 5 M stock buffered at pH 8.0). 20 μl Ni-NTA beads (Qiagen) were added per 1 ml of lysate, and the samples were incubated in a revolving mixer overnight at 4 °C.

After incubation, beads were sequentially washed with Wash Buffer 1 (6 M guanidine, 100 mM Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 10 mM Tris, 10 mM imidazole, 0.1% Triton X-100, 5 mM βME, pH 8.0) for 10 min, Wash Buffer 2 (8 M urea, 100 mM Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 10 mM TRIS, 10 mM imidazole, 0.1% Triton X-100, 5 mM βME, pH 8.0) for 10 min, Wash Buffer 3 (8 M urea, 100 mM Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 10 mM Tris, 10 mM imidazole, 5 mM βME, pH 6.3) for 20 min, and twice with Wash Buffer 4 (8 M urea, 100 mM Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 10 mM Tris, 5 mM βME, pH 6.3) for 20 min. SUMOylated proteins were eluted by the addition of one bead volume of Elution Buffer (7 M urea, 100 mM Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 10 mM Tris, 500 mM imidazole, pH 7.0) while shaking at 1,250 r.p.m. for 30 min. Elution was repeated twice, and all three eluates were pooled and filtered through 0.45-μm filter columns (Millipore). SUMOylated proteins were concentrated using 100-kDa molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) filters (Sartorius) and washed twice on the filter with LysC Digestion Buffer (8 M urea, 25 mM Tris, pH 8.0).

Purification of SUMOylated peptides.
Concentrated SUMOylated proteins were digested using LysC (Wako) at a 25:1 wt/wt ratio for 4 h at room temperature. The same amount of LysC was added again, and samples were digested overnight at room temperature. After digestion, the second Ni-NTA purification was performed by preparing the same amount of Ni-NTA beads as that used for the original samples, suspended in an amount of Lysis Buffer (supplemented with 5 mM βME and 50 mM imidazole) equal to half the amount used for the initial pulldown. The digested SUMOylated proteins were added directly to the suspension and incubated for 5 h in a revolving mixer at 4 °C. Subsequently, the beads were washed and eluted as described above. SUMOylated peptides were concentrated using 10-kDa MWCO filters (Sartorius), washed once on the filter with Alkylation Buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM Tris, 5 mM TCEP, 10 mM DTT, pH 8.0) and allowed to incubate on the filter for 30 min at room temperature before re-concentrating the samples.

Tryptic digestion of SUMOylated peptides.
Concentrated SUMOylated peptides were diluted with three volumes of Trypsin Digestion Buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 6.67 mM DTT) and incubated at room temperature for 15 min. Subsequently, an amount of trypsin equal to one-fourth of the amount of LysC used was added to the samples and allowed to incubate overnight at room temperature. Following digestion, samples were passed through 0.45-μm filters and re-digested with trypsin equal to one-eighth the amount of LysC used for 6 h at room temperature. It is important to note is that samples were not acidified at this point. Digested SUMOylated peptides were stored at −80 °C until further processing.

Fractionation and concentration of SUMO remnant peptides by StageTip.
For each sample, two C18 StageTips were prepared, as described previously61. The fractionation was performed at the step in the protocol at which StageTips are normally used to de-salt and purify the samples30 using exactly the same StageTip materials and can thus be seamlessly integrated into the protocol without requiring expensive equipment. Samples were split in two, and one half of the sample was acidified by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 2%. The other half was supplemented with ammonia to 20 mM, by adding one-tenth volume of 200 mM ammonia that was freshly prepared from a 25% ammonia stock solution. All StageTip conditioning, loading, washing and elution procedures were performed in a temperature-controlled centrifuge at 25 °C and 1,000g. For low-pH single-shot analysis samples, StageTips were conditioned with 100 μl methanol, 100 μl 80% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid and twice with 50 μl acetic acid. For high-pH fractionation samples, StageTips were conditioned with 100 μl methanol, 100 μl 80% acetonitrile in 200 mM ammonia and twice with 50 μl ammonia. Samples were loaded onto the StageTips and either washed twice with 50 μl 0.5% acetic acid for low-pH single-shot analysis samples or washed twice with 50 μl 200 mM ammonia for high-pH fractionation. Low-pH single-shot samples were eluted with 30 μl 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid and then with 30 μl 60% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid, and the eluates were combined. High-pH fractionation samples were eluted as six fractions, using 30 μl of 2%, 4%, 7%, 10%, 15% or 50% acetonitrile in 200 mM ammonia (F1–F6, respectively). Additionally, the flowthrough from sample loading in the high-pH analysis was acidified with 2% TFA and re-processed by StageTip at low pH (F0). All samples were completely vacuum-dried using a SpeedVac at 45 °C, after which the low-pH single-shot samples were dissolved in 12 μl 0.1% formic acid, and high-pH fractions were dissolved in 6 μl 0.1% formic acid. All samples were stored frozen at −20 °C until analysis.

Mass spectrometric analysis.
For all experimental replicates, 5 μl of the single-shot samples and 5 μl of all individual fractions were analyzed. All samples were analyzed on columns 15 cm long with a 75-μm internal diameter, which was packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9-μm beads (Dr. Maisch) and connected to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were eluted off the column using different gradient types depending on the fraction analyzed. Here we summarize the core elution profile, excluding the washing block at the end of the runs. Single-shot samples were eluted over a 140-min gradient increasing from 5% to 30% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% formic acid (FA). F0 samples were eluted over a 40-min gradient increasing from 5% to 20% ACN in 0.1% FA. F1 samples were eluted over a 70-min gradient increasing from 2% to 30% ACN in 0.1% FA. F2, F3 and F4 samples were eluted over a 70-min gradient increasing from 5% to 30% ACN in 0.1% FA. F5 and F6 samples were eluted over a 70-min gradient increasing from 10% to 35% ACN in 0.1% FA. The column was heated to 40 °C, and samples were ionized using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo) and analyzed using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Spray voltage was set to 2 kV, capillary temperature to 275 °C and S-Lens RF level to 50%. For full scans, a resolution setting of 60,000, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3,000,000, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a scan range of 300–1,750 m/z were used. These settings were consistent across all replicates to allow for MS1-level comparison by matching between runs. Precursors were fragmented using higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 25, an AGC target set at 100,000 and a precursor isolation width of 1.3 m/z. Unassigned charges, and charges 1 and 7+, were excluded. For single-shot and fraction analysis, dynamic exclusions of 60 s and 30 s, respectively, were used. To increase site-identification depth, a series of replicates were analyzed using one of four MS/MS methods. Consistent methods were used across different cell lines and treatments to allow for comparison. The 'fast' method used a loop count of 12, a resolution of 30,000, a maximum injection time of 55 ms and an underfill ratio of 11% (200,000 intensity threshold). The 'medium' method used a loop count of 9, a resolution of 30,000, a maximum injection time of 85 ms and an underfill ratio of 8.5% (100,000 intensity threshold). The 'sensitive' method used a loop count of 7, a resolution of 60,000, a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an underfill ratio of 6% (50,000 intensity threshold). The 'ultra-sensitive' method used a loop count of 3, a resolution of 120,000, a maximum injection time of 250 ms and an underfill ratio of 6% (25,000 intensity threshold).

Raw data analysis.
MS proteomics RAW data are available at the ProteomeXchange Consortium database via the Proteomics Identifications (PRIDE) partner repository62, under data set IDs PXD004927 (primary data) and PXD005296 (CDKi data). All primary RAW files (three proteotoxic treatments and control) were analyzed in a single computational run using MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30 (refs. 63,64). Follow-up RAW files (CDKi treatment and control) were analyzed separately but with the same settings. Default MaxQuant settings were used for data analysis, with the exceptions and noteworthy default settings described below. For generation of the theoretical peptide library, a FASTA database containing all human proteins was downloaded from UniProt on the 28th of July, 2016. RAW files were grouped as one of the 32 (primary data) or 16 (CDKi data) experimental replicates analyzed. Fraction numbers 0–6 were used to indicate fractionated samples, with fraction number 8 used for single-shot samples. For group-specific parameters, maximum missed cleavages were set to 4, label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled with a minimum ratio count of 1, Fast LFQ (default) and skipped normalization. Maximum number of modifications per peptide was set to 4, with the following variable modifications: protein N-terminal acetylation (default), methionine oxidation (default), QQTGG on lysine (described in previous work1), pyroQQTGG on lysine (described in previous work1), and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine. For global parameters, minimum peptide length was set to 6, maximum peptide mass was set to 6,000, and protein quantification minimum ratio count was set to 1, while allowing the same variable modifications as listed above. Matching between runs was enabled, with a match time window of 2 min and an alignment time window of 40 min. Data were automatically filtered at the peptide-spectrum-match, protein and site-identification levels by posterior error probability to yield a false discovery rate of <1% (default); a mass tolerance of 4.5 p.p.m. was applied (default), and modified peptides were filtered for an Andromeda score of >40 (default) and a delta score of >6 (default). In addition, the SUMO site output of MaxQuant was manually filtered for a localization delta score of >6, the presence of QQTGG mass remnant fragments (diagnostic peaks) in the MS/MS spectra, and the absence of a reversed database hit. For generation of the merged SUMO site list, the individual QQTGG and pyroQQTGG tables were manually combined, and 51–amino acid sequence windows were extracted based on leading protein and site position. Subsequently, all sites were ordered by Andromeda scores, and lower-scoring duplicate sequence windows were removed. SUMOylated protein groups were reconstructed based on the 'proteinGroups.txt' output file from MaxQuant, but with identified sites manually mapped back to proteins in the list, to prevent assignment of sites which were discarded by manual filtering as described above. Proteins not identified by at least one SUMOylated peptide were discarded.

Quantification and scoring of SUMO sites and proteins.
For quantification of proteins, LFQ intensities were normalized, and missing values were imputed using Perseus software65. For quantification of sites, intensities were normalized, and missing values were imputed using Perseus. In all cases, proteins and sites were flagged if they were detected in at least four out of four replicates corresponding to any cell line and treatment combination. Quantification of proteins and sites in response to cellular stress was performed using two-sample testing in Perseus, with a permutation-based FDR of 5% and a p0 value of 2. For overall ranking of SUMO target proteins, a SUMO target score was calculated based on the amounts of sites identified, protein assignment q-value, intensity, total MS/MS counts, MS/MS counts corresponding to standard growth conditions, and fraction of SUMO intensity derived from K-x-E and I/V/L-K-x-E motifs. For overall ranking of SUMO sites, a SUMO site score was calculated based on the Andromeda score, delta score, localization delta score, total intensity, total MS/MS counts, MS/MS counts corresponding to standard growth conditions and fractional contribution of the site to the total protein modification.

Identification and quantification of co-modified peptides.
For identification of peptides co-modified with SUMO and phosphorylation, the primary MaxQuant data searches (either primary or CDKi data) were used. For co-modification of SUMO together with ubiquitin, acetylation and methylation, three separate searches were performed on the primary data, to manage search space and FDR. These additional searches were only used for detection of multiply modified peptides. In all cases, the 'evidence.txt' output file from MaxQuant was used to locate co-modified peptides, only considering direct MS/MS identifications, and for only evidences with a localization delta score of >6 for both SUMOylation and the other PTM. Subsequently, a combined co-modification delta score (combined score) was calculated from the excess scoring of co-modified peptides over the default FDR cut-offs described above, which were calculated primarily from the delta score but also factored in the Andromeda score and localization delta score. The combined score essentially represented a means of applying an additional layer of FDR on top of the default FDR applied by MaxQuant. Co-modified peptides were subsequently filtered for assignment to the SUMO site table, the other PTM table or otherwise a >40 combined score, and a >20 combined score. Peptides were sorted by descending combined score, and duplicate modified peptides were discarded. 51-residue amino acid sequence windows were assigned to all SUMO and other PTM locations in the modified peptides, and duplicate sequence window combinations were discarded. Finally, quantitative peptide information was aligned to the database from the modificationSpecificPeptides.txt. Prior to alignment, intensity values were normalized across all SUMO-modified peptides. In the case of phosphorylation, SUMO-only and co-modified peptides were aligned to the corresponding sequence to assess the co-modification ratio. In the case of other PTMs, only co-modified peptides were aligned, as SUMO-only peptides would be subject to a different tryptic digestion pattern, which would prevent accurate alignment. After alignment, missing values were imputed, and quantification was performed using Perseus, as described above. For phosphorylation, co-modified peptides were tested against corresponding SUMO-only peptides for all cell line and treatment combinations. For all PTMs, dynamic changes of co-modified peptides in response to the treatments were tested.

Large-scale kinase prediction.
For prediction of kinases, the NetworKIN online resource was used in high-throughput mode66. All unique phosphorylation co-modification sites were used as input, along with 1,000 random phosphorylation sites detected in at least three studies as extracted from the PhosphoSitePlus online database67. The top three kinase and kinase-group predictions were aligned to the SUMO and phosphorylation co-modified peptide database, with predictions passing the default NetworKIN score cut-offs indicated. Global kinase and kinase-group enrichment was assessed by comparing SUMO-proximal predicted kinases to randomly predicted kinases, using Fisher's exact test with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR of 2%.

Large-scale structural prediction.
All 6,747 SUMO target proteins identified in this study were, in their entirety, subjected to structural predictive analysis. To assess which regions of proteins were disordered (D-type) or globular (G-type), the IUPred workflow was used68. To determine which regions of proteins were solvent-exposed (E-type) or buried (B-type), the ACCpro workflow was used69. Predictions from both workflows were merged, using IUPred predictions to classify disordered lysines and globular lysines. G-type lysines were further classified using IUPred predictions, as globular-exposed (GE-type) and globular-buried (GB-type). All disordered lysines were considered to be exposed, resulting in three final classifications for all lysines: D-type, GE-type and GB-type.

Sequence logo generation.
For generation of all sequence logos, amino acid enrichment profiles and amino acid enrichment heatmaps, iceLogo software was used70. As a reference data set, 67,810 human phosphorylation sites identified in at least three studies were extracted from PhosphoSitePlus, and sequence windows (51 amino acids long) were assigned and used for comparison.

Term enrichment analysis.
Lists of proteins and sites were annotated using the human annotation database associated with Perseus, with terms including Gene Ontology (GO) Biological Processes, GO Molecular Functions, GO Cellular Compartments, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), Pfam and CORUM (for "comprehensive resource of mammalian protein complexes"), in addition to general keywords. Protein subsets of interest were flagged and subsequently compared using Fisher's exact test as integrated into Perseus, with correction for multiple-hypotheses testing with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR of 2%. Scores were calculated by multiplication of logarithms of both enrichment ratios and corrected P values.

Alignment of proteomic studies.
For protein alignment, a scaffold was created based on all unique gene identifiers, as downloaded from UniProt on 17 August 2016. Relevant protein identifier and name information was aligned, in addition to protein mass and UniProt annotation scores. Subsequently, proteins that were identified as SUMO targets in this study were aligned to the matrix, along with SUMO target score, the amount of sites identified and the global stress responsiveness ratio. Subsequently, SUMO target proteins identified in several other SUMO proteomics studies1,21,22,24,25,27,28,39,71,72, and all proteins identified in a total proteome study31, were aligned in the matrix. Alignment was performed by UniProt identifier, where possible, or by gene name. For site alignment, a scaffold was created based on all unique 51-residue amino acid sequence windows corresponding to SUMO sites identified in this study, as well as to SUMO sites identified in other SUMO proteomics studies1,21,23,24,25,27,28,71,72. Subsequently, all studies were aligned to the scaffold by sequence window, along with relevant protein information. SUMO site score and stress responsiveness ratios were derived from this study. For comparison of proteome-sequencing depth, SUMO site and protein-intensity data derived from our study, as well as total proteome data31, and phosphoproteome data32 were 2-log transformed, and top intensity values were removed until the top ten remaining values had an s.d. of <0.1, to ensure accurate top-end alignment. Subsequently, intensity values were normalized to have a maximum intensity value of 0, with lower intensity values going into negative numbers. Next, intensities were binned in steps of one (i.e., factors of two) and plotted.

Data availability.
MS proteomics RAW data are available at the ProteomeXchange Consortium database via the Proteomics Identifications (PRIDE) partner repository, under data set IDs PXD004927 (primary data) and PXD005296 (CDKi data). Other data can be obtained from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

