=== TITLE ===
Proteomic analysis of O-GlcNAcylated proteins in invasive ductal breast carcinomas with and without lymph node metastasis

=== ABSTRACT ===
The potential role of protein O-GlcNAcylation in cancer has been studied extensively, and the spread of cancer cells to regional lymph nodes is the first step in the dissemination of breast cancer. However, the correlation between O-GlcNAcylation and lymphatic metastasis in breast cancer remains elusive. In this study, we demonstrated that the overall O-GlcNAcylation as well as O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) tends to decrease in response to the augmentation of lymph node metastasis (LNM) in invasive ductal breast carcinomas (IDCs). Although accumulating evidence indicates that individual O-GlcNAcylation may be important in the pathogenesis of breast cancer, O-GlcNAcylated proteins in IDCs are still largely unexplored. Herein, O-GlcNAcylated proteins of IDCs were chemo-enzymatically enriched and identified via liquid chromatography combined with tandem mass spectrometry. In total, 155 O-GlcNAcylated proteins were determined, of which 41 were only observed in LNM tissues, while 40 were unique in non-LNM samples. Gene ontology analysis showed that O-GlcNAc is primarily a nucleocytoplasmic post-translational modification, and most enriched functional terms were related to cancer development in both metastatic and non-metastatic IDCs. Moreover, several O-GlcNAcylated proteins involved in glycolysis and its accessory pathway were identified from LNM and non-LNM groups, respectively. These results indicate that the O-GlcNAcylation statuses of individual proteins were independent of the overall O-GlcNAcylation levels of metastatic and non-metastatic IDCs. Aberrant O-GlcNAc modification of these proteins might be associated with LNM progression.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Materials
Protein extraction kit was purchased from Keygen Biotech (Nanjing, China). BCA protein assay was from Dingguo (Beijing, China). The anti-bodies used were anti-β-actin, anti-OGT, anti-MGEA5 (OGA), anti-O-GlcNAc (RL2), anti-mouse horseradish peroxidase conjugate, anti-HSPA6, anti-Catalase and anti-rabbit horseradish peroxidase conjugate from abcam (Cambridge, USA); anti-eEF1A from Cell Signaling Technology (Bevely, MA, USA); and anti-tetramethyl-6-carboxyrhodamine (TAMRA) from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA). Peptide: N-glycosidase F (PNGase F) from New England BioLabs (Ipswich, MA, USA). HPLC-grade methanol, formic acid and acetonitrile were from Fisher Scientific (Fairlawn, NJ, USA). Other reagents used were of analytical grade.

Patients and samples
The studied material was obtained from Central Hospital of Taian (Taian, China) and comprised samples of 53 IDCs of breast. Twenty-seven specimens were treated as LNM and 26 as non-LNM (Table 1). All fresh samples were stored at −80 °C before analysis. The tissue specimens collected in the operation room were prepared and evaluated by an experienced pathologist. The study was approved by the institutional review boards at Center for Disease Control and Prevention of Shandong Province, and informed consent was obtained from each subject.

Table 1 Characteristics of cases used in the study
Full size table
Sample preparation
The breast tissues were cut into small pieces and homogenized in ice-cold chilled PBS using a Wheaton glass homogenizer. After 5 min’ standing, precipitate was removed from the mixture, and the supernatant was pipetted directly into a new tube and centrifuged at 4 °C for 5 min at 500×g. The obtained precipitate was re-dissolved in ice-cold lysis buffer (0.32 M sucrose, 20 mM HEPES, 1 % Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM EGTA, and 0.1 M GlcNAc pH 7.4 with 4 μg/ml leupeptin, 4 μg/ml pepstatin A and 5 μg/ml aprotinin, 0.1 mM PMSF and 2 mM Na3VO4). The mixture was set on ice and sonicated 4× 10 s on 20 % power using a Scientz II D ultrasonic generator (SCIENTZ, Ningbo, China) and then centrifuged at 4 °C for 30 min at 16,000×g. The resulting supernatant represents the cytosolic fraction. Protein concentration of the obtained cell lysates was determined by BCA protein assay (Dingguo, Beijing, China) and measured on Thermo Scientific Varioskan Flash (Thermo Scientific, USA).

Western blot
Samples (30 μg of cell lysates isolated from tumor tissues) were mixed with 5× loading buffer (0.25 M Tris–HCl, pH 6.8, 50 % glycerol, 5 % β-mercaptoethanol, 10 % sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 0.5 % bromophenol blue), heated 10 min at 100 °C, separated on 12 % SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and transferred to PVDF membranes (0.22 μM, Millipore). Membranes were blocked in 5 % non-fat dry milk TBST (10 mM Tris–HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 % Tween-20) (w/v) for 2 h at 37 °C and then incubated with primary antibody and blocking solution overnight at 4 °C. After washing four times with TBST, membranes were incubated with secondary antibody diluted in blocking solution for 1 h at room temperature. Membranes were washed four times with TBST and subsequently incubated with Clarity Western ECL Substrate (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The target proteins were then visualized and collected using a Tannon gel imaging system (Tannon, Shanghai, China). The bands on membranes were quantified using Gel-Pro Analyzer 3.0 density analysis software (Media Cybernetics, USA).

Chemoenzymatic labeling of O-GlcNAc proteins
Twenty μg of cell lysates of each IDC sample were prepared and mixed separately, according to their LNM pattern. The combined LNM or non-LNM sample was precipitated with 4 volumes ice-cold acetone followed by overnight incubation at −20 °C and redissolved in 2 % SDS plus Complete™ protease inhibitors (Roche). Five hundred μg of precipitated protein from mixed LNM or non-LNM sample was labeled using a Click-iT enzymatic labeling kit (Invitrogen, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, sample was resuspended in 1 mL Hepes buffer (20 mM, pH 7.9). To the solution was added 250 of μL MnCl2 (100 mM), 400 μL of UDP-GalNAz, 40 μL of GalT1 (Y289L), and 2 μL of PNGase F (500 U), and the mixture were incubated at 4 °C overnight. The labeled proteins were precipitated by sequential mixing with 3 mL of MeOH, 1 mL of CHCl3 and 2.25 mL H2O. After which the mixture was centrifuged at 16,000×g for 20 min. Precipitated proteins were resuspended in 50 mM Tris pH 7.4 containing 1 % SDS at 5 μg/μL and subsequently reacted with alkyne-TAMRA (Invitrogen) as per the Click-It™ TAMRA Glycoprotein Detection Kit (Invitrogen) instructions, except that EDTA-free Complete™ protease inhibitors (Roche) were added during the TAMRA labeling reaction.

Immunoprecipitation of TAMRA-labeled O-GlcNAc proteins
Chemoenzymatically labeled samples were precipitated using MeOH/CHCl3/H2O as described above and re-dissolved in boiling 1 % SDS plus Complete™ protease inhibitors at a concentration of 2.5 μg/μL. The SDS was then quenched with 1 volume of NETFD buffer (100 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.4, 5 mM EDTA, 6 % NP-40) plus protease inhibitors, and the lysates were precleared against pre-washed protein G magnetic beads (Millipore; 200 μL/1 mg of protein) at 4 °C for 2 h. Following magnetic adsorption, the supernatant was collected and incubated with an anti-TAMRA antibody (80 µL/1 mg of protein) at 4 °C for 3 h. The mixture was then added to pre-washed protein G magnetic beads (100 μL/1 mg) at 4 °C for 2 h. After magnetic adsorption, the beads were washed twice with 500 µL of NETFD buffer and three times with 500 µL of NETF buffer (100 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.4, 5 mM EDTA). After washing, the beads were incubated with 0.2 M glycine (pH 2.5) for 1–2 min. The supernatant was transferred and neutralized with 1 M Tris (pH 8.5) and boiled in elution buffer (200 mM Tris pH 6.8, 400 mM DTT, 8 % SDS, 50 µL buffer/100 µL beads). The supernatant was collected after centrifugation and precipitated by adding 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone and incubating at −20 °C overnight.

In-Gel digestion of captured O-GlcNAc proteins
The obtained precipitated proteins were finally concentrated in a 4 % stacking gel of SDS-PAGE. Individual gel pieces (LNM sample and non-LNM sample) were dehydrated with ACN (3 × 5 min) and then rehydrated with dithiothreitol (1.5 mg/mL in 100 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0) for 30 min. The excess dithiothreitol was removed and iodoacetamide (10 mg/mL in 100 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0) was added in the dark for 30 min. Excess iodoacetamide was removed and the gels were washed twice with 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) and dried with ACN before being dried using a speed vac. Sequencing grade modified trypsin (Sigma; 20 ng/µL in 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0; 50 µL) was added to each gel piece, and the gel pieces were allowed to swell on ice. After 30 min, excess trypsin was removed, 30µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) was added, and the digestions were incubated at 37 °C. After 16 h, the peptides were extracted with 60 µL of H2O for 30 min, and the gel pieces were washed twice with an aqueous solution of 5 % formic acid containing 40 µL of 50 % ACN for 10 min. The combined extract and washes were concentrated using a speed vac for 1 h to remove the ACN. The resulting peptide mixture obtained from tryptic in-gel digestion was collected for subsequent LC–MS/MS analysis.

Nano-LC–MS analysis
Online LC–MS analysis was performed on an online nanoflow-liquid-chromatography and electrospray-ionization-mass-spectrometry system (EASY-nLC Q Exactive) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). A nano-LC column (75 μm I.D. × 10 cm, packed with Pepmap C18 sorbent) was employed for peptide separation. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1 % formic acid and 2 % ACN in water, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1 % formic acid and 2 % water in ACN. The chromatography gradient was designed for a linear increase from 5 % B to 8 % B in 8 min, 8 % B to 22 % B in 50 min, 22 % B to 32 % B in 12 min, 32 % B to 90 % B and 90 % B for 3 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Q-Exactive ion source was operated at 1.8 kV. For full MS survey scans the AGC target was 3 × e6, the maximum injection time was 60 ms, and the scan range was m/z 300–1400 with a resolution of 70,000. The 20 most intense peaks with charge state ≥2 were selected for sequencing and fragmented in the HCD cell with a normalized collision energy of 27 %. For data-dependent MS/MS scans the AGC target was 5 × e4, and the maximum injection time was 80 ms with a resolution of 17,500.

Raw files from the Q-Exactive were searched by Proteome Discovery version 1.3 using the SEQUEST search engine with the Percolator function. The mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm for precursor ions, and 20 mmu for product ions. Oxidation (Met) was chosen as variable modification; carbamidomethyl (Cys) was chosen as a fixed modification. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % was estimated, and applied to all data sets at the total peptide level.

The mass spectrometry raw data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://www.proteomexchange) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD002208 (Vizcaíno et al. 2013).

Data analysis
Signal intensities of western blot obtained from Gel Pro Analyzer were normalized to loading control (β-actin). The data were imported to Origin7.5 (OriginLab Corporation) for generating graphs, shown as mean ± standard error (SEM). Statistical difference was determined using Student’s t test and was considered significant when p < 0.05. Biological functions and pathways enriched in the generated O-GlcNAc data were evaluated using IPA (Ingenuity Systems, www.ingenuity.com). A right-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to calculate a p-value determining the probability that each biological function assigned to that data set is due to chance alone. The p-value was corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the method of Benjamini–Hochberg.

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

