=== TITLE ===
Proteomics reveals the effects of sustained weight loss on the human plasma proteome


=== ABSTRACT ===
Sustained weight loss is a preferred intervention in a wide range of metabolic conditions, but the effects on an individual's health state remain ill‐defined. Here, we investigate the plasma proteomes of a cohort of 43 obese individuals that had undergone 8 weeks of 12% body weight loss followed by a year of weight maintenance. Using mass spectrometry‐based plasma proteome profiling, we measured 1,294 plasma proteomes. Longitudinal monitoring of the cohort revealed individual‐specific protein levels with wide‐ranging effects of losing weight on the plasma proteome reflected in 93 significantly affected proteins. The adipocyte‐secreted SERPINF1 and apolipoprotein APOF1 were most significantly regulated with fold changes of −16% and +37%, respectively (P < 10−13), and the entire apolipoprotein family showed characteristic differential regulation. Clinical laboratory parameters are reflected in the plasma proteome, and eight plasma proteins correlated better with insulin resistance than the known marker adiponectin. Nearly all study participants benefited from weight loss regarding a ten‐protein inflammation panel defined from the proteomics data. We conclude that plasma proteome profiling broadly evaluates and monitors intervention in metabolic diseases.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Study design
Details of the weight loss study design are published elsewhere (Iepsen et al, 2015). In total, 58 obese study participants were recruited with the following inclusion criteria: healthy individuals with a BMI between 30 and 40 kg/m2 and an age between 18 and 65 years. Excluded were participants with any acute or chronic illness other than obesity, any medical treatment with known effects on glucose and lipid metabolism, appetite or food intake, pregnancy or breast feeding and fasting plasma glucose levels of ≥7 mmol/l.

Study participants followed a weekly supervised very low‐calorie powder diet (800 kcal per day; Cambridge Weight Plan, Corby, UK) for 8 weeks to achieve a weight loss of at least 7.5% of the initial body weight after 8 weeks (Riecke et al, 2010).

During the weight maintenance phase, the calorie intake of the study participants was restricted to the estimated daily energy needs subtracted by 600 kcal. In the case of weight gain, up to two meals a day during the weight maintenance period were allowed to be replaced by Cambridge Weight Plan products to ensure weight maintenance. Half of the participants also received 1.2 mg of liraglutide (daily) after weight loss. Both groups equally successfully maintained the weight loss with no significant change in weight from after weight loss to 1 year of weight maintenance (Iepsen et al, 2015). The difference in plasma proteomes between liraglutide‐treated and non‐treated individuals was subtle at our depth and accuracy of proteome measurement and was not further pursued in our analysis.

Blood samples were taken before weight loss (week −8), directly after (week 0) and at five time points during weight loss (weeks 4, 13, 26, 39, 52). Weight was measured at each visit, and further data for each participant were acquired for time points −8, 0, and 52.

The study was approved by the ethical committee in Copenhagen (reference number: H‐4‐210‐134) and was performed in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration II and with ICH‐GCP practice. Participation in the investigation was voluntary and the individuals could at any time retract their consent to participate. CliniclTrials.gov identifier: NCT02094183.

Highly abundant protein depletion for building a matching library
We built up a matching library and used a depletion of the top 20 most abundant plasma proteins by a combination of two immunodepletion kits (Nagaraj et al, 2012; Geyer et al, 2016). Plasma samples of three women and three men were obtained from a highly reliable reference blood bank (PlasmaRef Panels) from the Blutspendedienst des Bayerischen Roten Kreuzes. The Agilent Multiple Affinity Removal Spin Cartridge was used for the depletion of the top six highly abundant proteins (albumin, IgG, IgA, antitrypsin, transferrin, and haptoglobin), followed by ProteoPrep20 Plasma Immunodepletion Kit for the 20 highest abundant proteins (albumin, IgG, IgA, IgM, IgD, transferrin, fibrinogen, α2‐macroglobulin, α1‐antitrypsin, haptoglobin, α1‐acid glycoprotein, ceruloplasmin, apolipoprotein A‐I, apolipoprotein A‐II, apolipoprotein B, complement C1q, complement C3, complement C4, plasminogen, and prealbumin). Samples were depleted, digested, and measured in triplicate in the same way as the non‐depleted sample set of the weight loss study.

Sample preparation: protein digestion and in‐StageTip purification
Sample preparation was carried out as described in Geyer et al (2016) and Kulak et al (2014) with the automated setup on an Agilent Bravo liquid handling platform. Plasma samples were diluted 1:10 with ddH2O and 10 μl of the sample was mixed with 10 μl twofold concentrated SDC buffer. Reduction and alkylation were carried out at 95°C for 10 min. Trypsin and LysC (1:100 μg of enzyme to micrograms of protein ratio) were added to the mixture after a 5‐min cooling step at room temperature. Digestion was performed at 37°C for 1 h. The digest was acidified by adding 40 μl of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in isopropanol. An amount of 20 μg of peptides was loaded on two 14‐gauge StageTip plugs, followed by the addition of 100 μl 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in isopropanol and strong mixing. The StageTips were centrifuged using a 3D‐printed in‐house‐made StageTip centrifugal device at 1,500 g. After washing the StageTips two times using 100 μl 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in isopropanol and one time using 100 μl 0.2% TFA in ddH2O, purified peptides were eluted by 60 μl of elution buffer into autosampler vials. The collected material was completely dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge at 60°C (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus). Peptides were suspended in buffer A* (Kulak et al, 2014) and afterward sonicated (Branson Ultrasonics, Ultrasonic Cleaner Model 2510). It was not possible to obtain any peptides from one of the samples (# 44_1).

Ultra‐high‐pressure liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry
Samples were measured using LC‐MS instrumentation consisting of an EASY‐nLC 1000 ultra‐high‐pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was combined with a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a nano‐electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (Scheltema et al, 2014). Purified peptides were separated on 40‐cm HPLC columns [ID: 75 μm; in‐house packed into the tip with ReproSil‐Pur C18‐AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)]. For each LC‐MS/MS analysis, around 1 μg peptides was used for 45‐min runs and for each fraction of the deep plasma dataset.

Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and eluted with a linear 18‐min gradient of 5–20% of buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 60% (v/v) acetonitrile), followed stepwise by a 12‐min increase to 35% of buffer B, a 6 min to 50% of buffer B, 5.5‐min increase to 98% of buffer B, followed by a 3.5‐min wash of 98% buffer B at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. Column temperature was kept at 60°C by a Peltier element containing in‐house‐developed oven, and parameters were monitored in real time by the SprayQC software (Scheltema & Mann, 2012). MS data were acquired with a Top15 data‐dependent MS/MS scan method (topN method). Target values for the full‐scan MS spectra were 3 × 106 charges in the 300–1,650 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 55 ms and a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Fragmentation of precursor ions was performed by higher‐energy C‐trap dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV. MS/MS scans were performed at a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200 with an ion target value of 1 × 105 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s to avoid repeated sequencing of identical peptides.

Data analysis
Mass spectrometry raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.23 (Cox & Mann, 2008), and peptide lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (version June 2015). A contaminants database by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011) with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N‐terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications was used. We set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 0.01 for protein and peptide levels with a minimum length of seven amino acids for peptides, and the FDR was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set as C‐terminal to arginine and lysine as expected using trypsin and LysC as proteases, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide identification was performed with an initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. The “match between run algorithm” in the MaxQuant quantification (Nagaraj et al, 2012) was performed after constructing a matching library consistent of depleted and all the undepleted plasma samples from the weight loss study. All proteins and peptides matching to the reversed database were filtered out. Label‐free protein quantitation (LFQ) was performed with a minimum ratio count of 1 (Cox et al, 2014).

Bioinformatics analysis
All bioinformatics analyses were done with the Perseus software of the MaxQuant computational platform (Cox & Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al, 2016). For statistical analysis of significantly changed proteins before (week −8) and directly after weight loss (week 0), a one‐sample t‐test was used with a false discovery rate of < 0.05 after Benjamini–Hochberg correction. We only considered highly significant proteins with a P‐value of P < 0.0005 for the hierarchical clustering in Fig 4. For all correlation analyses, a false discovery rate of < 0.05 after Benjamini–Hochberg correction was applied.

All data needed for correlation analysis of classical clinical parameters like BMI, weight, levels of cholesterol, leptin, HDL, LDL, and triglycerides as well as HOMA‐IR to MS‐based proteomic acquired LFQ intensities are available for all study participants and time points (Table EV8).

Data and materials availability
The MS‐based proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository and are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD004242.


=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

