=== TITLE ===
In-depth proteomic analyses of ovarian cancer cell line exosomes reveals differential enrichment of functional categories compared to the NCI 60 proteome

=== ABSTRACT ===
Molecular communication between cancer cells and its stromal microenvironment is a key factor for cancer progression. Alongside classic secretory pathways, it has recently been proposed that small membranous vesicles are alternative mediators of intercellular communication. Exosomes carry an effector-rich proteome with the ability to modulate various functional properties of the recipient cell. In this study, exosomes isolated from four epithelial ovarian cancer cell lines (OVCAR3, OVCAR433, OVCAR5 and SKOV3) were characterized using mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Using an optimized workflow consisting of efficient exosome solubilization and the latest generation of proteomic instrumentation, we demonstrate improved detection depth. Systematic comparison of our cancer cell line exosome proteome against public data (Exocarta) and the recently published NCI 60 proteome revealed enrichment of functional categories related to signaling biology and biomarker discovery.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
2.1. Cell culture
The four EOC cell lines, OVCAR3, OVCAR433, OVCAR5 and SKOV3 cell lines were grown in RPMI-1640 media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, and 100 U/ml penicillin–streptomycin (all from Gibco, Canada). Cells were cultured in ten 150 mm dishes at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 humidified incubator. Once 80% confluency was achieved, the supernatant was removed and the monolayer was rinsed twice with warm PBS followed by addition of 20 mL of serum free media (RPMI-1640 media without phenol red and 100 U/ml penicillin–streptomycin) per plate. Cells were starved for 48 h at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 humidified incubator. The supernatant from each plate was collected and pooled into 50 mL conical tubes (for a total of 200 mL of supernatant from each cell line).
2.2. Exosome isolation
Total supernatant was subjected to differential centrifugation for exosome isolation as previously described [12]. All centrifugations were performed at 4 °C. Briefly, loose cells were pelleted at 300×g for 10 min, while cellular debris were pelleted at 2000×g for 20 min. The supernatant was recovered and microvesicles and small cellular artifacts were sedimented by centrifuging at 10,000×g for 30 min. The supernatant was concentrated from a total volume of 200 to 9 mL using a 3000 Da molecular weight cut-off centrifugal filter (Millipore, Germany). The concentrated suspension and was centrifuged in a Type 70.1 Ti ultracentrifuge rotor at 120,000×g for 2 h. The supernatant was gently removed and the exosome pellet and washed with 9 mL of PBS solution. A second round of ultracentrifugation was performed with the same parameters, yielding an enriched exosome pellet.
2.3. Transmission electron microscopy – TEM
Exosome pellets prepared as previously described were re-suspended in 20 μL of PBS buffer. Fixation, embedding and image acquisition by TEM was performed at the Advanced Bioimaging Centre, Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada.
2.4. 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol-assisted protein extraction and trypsin digestion
Exosome pellets were subjected to denaturation, reduction, alkylation and trypsinization with slight modifications as previously described [13], [14]. Briefly, exosome pellets were re-constituted in 150 μL of 50% (v/v) 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) in PBS buffer. The suspension was incubated at 60 °C for two hours with brief agitation every 30 min. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM of DTT (Sigma, Canada) at 60 °C for 30 min. Carbamidomethylation of reduced cysteines was performed with 25 mM of IAA (Sigma) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, samples were diluted five times using freshly prepared 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer at pH 8.0. Proteins were digested using 5 μg of mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Promega, USA) at 37 °C overnight. Digested peptide mixtures were desalted and purified using OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent, USA) and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation. The semi-dry pellet of peptides was reconstituted to a volume of 16 μL using LC–MS grade water/0.1% formic acid.
2.5. Mass spectrometry analysis
Peptide concentrations were determined using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). Mass spectrometry was carried out using a QExactive tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Easy-Spray nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 nano flow ultra-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). Analytical chromatography was performed using a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (PepMap C18, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific) heated to 40 °C. For each analysis 2 μg of peptides were loaded on the analytical column. Elution buffers used for reverse phase chromatography consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid as solvent A and 100% acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid as solvent B. Peptides were separated over an analytical gradient of 5–30% solvent B in 230 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/minute. Data was acquired on a QExactive mass spectrometer running a top 10 data dependent acquisition method. All MS1 spectra were acquired at resolution of 70,000 with scan range of 400–1600 m/z, while MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution of 17,500.
2.6. Database searching and protein identification
The acquired data was searched by MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2 [15] against the UniProt complete human proteome protein sequence database (version: 2012-07-19, number of sequences: 20,232). Searches were performed with fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm, maximum missed cleavage of 2 and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. False discovery was controlled using a target/decoy approach with false discovery level set to 1% (for peptides and proteins). Only protein groups identified with at least two or more peptides (sum of razor and unique) were carried forward in the analysis.
2.7. Statistics and data analysis
All statistical analyses were performed using R and its standard packages. Gene Ontology and protein keyword analysis were performed using the Protein Center bioinformatics software (Thermo Scientific). Only enriched groups with FDR p-value < 0.05 were reported.
2.8. Comparison to Exocarta and the NCI 60 proteome
A list of the 25 most commonly reported gene products in exosome studies were obtained from Exocarta [16], [17]. Briefly, gene identifiers from all human exosome studies in Exocarta with protein evidence were mapped to our proteomics data (via gene identifiers; this increased the total number of 3096 protein groups to 3252 gene identifiers for our exosome data). Abundance intensities of exosome proteins shared with Exocarta were mapped against protein groups uniquely identified in the present study. Similarly, iBAQ intensities were used for the comparison of protein groups identified in the NCI 60 dataset and the current EOC exosomes analyses [18], [19]. The NCI 60 dataset was mapped to our exosome data via the Protein Center software. Protein groups were considered statistically significantly different if p < 0.05 (Wilcoxon signed-rank test with p-values adjusted for multiple comparisons using Benjamini & Hochberg method) and biologically significantly different if protein intensity was equal or greater than a factor of two. Based on these criteria, protein groups were divided into three groups: higher abundance in exosome, equal abundance, and lower abundance in exosome.
2.9. Western blot analysis
All cells were harvested upon completion of 48 h starvation in serum-free media. The cell monolayer was washed twice with ice-cold PBS and scraped and lysed immediately in the presence of lysis buffer (20 mM Tris–HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Igepal, pH 7.5 supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail; Roche Diagnostics) maintained at 4 °C. Exosome suspensions were lysed similarly. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation (14,000×g, 10 min at 4 °C) and protein amount was determined using a Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Fisher Scientific). Denaturing SDS–Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was performed in 12% acrylamide gels using equivalent total protein (10 μg for three cell lines; with the exception of OVCAR433 exosomes, where 30 μg were used). Separated proteins were transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes through electroblotting. Western blots were performed using primary and secondary antibodies coupled to HRP, diluted according to the suppliers’ recommendations. The antibodies used were anti-CD81 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, Texas, USA), anti-flotillin-1 (FLOT-1, BD Biosciences, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada), anti-VDAC1 (Sigma–Aldrich), anti-calreticulin (CALR, Sigma–Aldrich), rabbit anti-aconitase 2 (ACO2, Sigma–Aldrich), mouse anti-GAPDH (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and mouse anti-β-Actin (ACTB, Sigma–Aldrich). All antibodies were raised in mouse, except VDAC1 and ACO2 that were raised in goat and rabbit, respectively. Signals were visualized using the SuperSignal West Pico and Femto maximum sensitivity substrates system (Thermo Scientific). Upon completion of protein immunoblot, membranes were stained with PageBlue protein staining substrate (Thermo Scientific) to verify equal loading.

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

