=== TITLE ===
Looking for Missing Proteins in the Proteome of Human Spermatozoa: An Update.

=== ABSTRACT ===
The Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) aims to identify "missing" proteins in the neXtProt knowledgebase. We present an in-depth proteomics analysis of the human sperm proteome to identify testis-enriched missing proteins. Using protein extraction procedures and LC-MS/MS analysis, we detected 235 proteins (PE2-PE4) for which no previous evidence of protein expression was annotated. Through LC-MS/MS and LC-PRM analysis, data mining, and immunohistochemistry, we confirmed the expression of 206 missing proteins (PE2-PE4) in line with current HPP guidelines (version 2.0). Parallel reaction monitoring acquisition and sythetic heavy labeled peptides targeted 36 ≪one-hit wonder≫ candidates selected based on prior peptide spectrum match assessment. 24 were validated with additional predicted and specifically targeted peptides. Evidence was found for 16 more missing proteins using immunohistochemistry on human testis sections. The expression pattern for some of these proteins was specific to the testis, and they could possibly be valuable markers with fertility assessment applications. Strong evidence was also found of four "uncertain" proteins (PE5); their status should be re-examined. We show how using a range of sample preparation techniques combined with MS-based analysis, expert knowledge, and complementary antibody-based techniques can produce data of interest to the community. All MS/MS data are available via ProteomeXchange under identifier PXD003947. In addition to contributing to the C-HPP, we hope these data will stimulate continued exploration of the sperm proteome.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Ethics and Donor Consent The study protocol “Study of Normal and Pathological Human Spermatogenesis” was approved by the local ethics committee. The protocol was then registered as No. PFS09-015 at the French Biomedicine Agency. Informed consent was obtained from donors where appropriate. Sample Collection and Preparation Human semen samples were collected from five healthy donors of unproven fertility at Nantes University Hospital (France). The donors gave informed consent for the use of their semen for research purposes, and samples were anonymized. Semen samples were all obtained on-site by masturbation following 2 to 7 days of sexual abstinence. After 30 min of liquefaction at room temperature under gentle agitation, 1 mL of each sample was taken. Aliquots were pooled and a protease inhibitor mix (protease inhibitor cocktail tablets, complete mini EDTA-free, Roche, Meylan, France) was added according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To separate sperm cells from seminal plasma and round cells, we loaded the pooled sperm sample onto 1 mL of a 50% suspension of silica particles (SupraSperm, Origio, Malov, Denmark) diluted in Sperm Washing medium (Origio, Malov, Denmark). The sample was centrifuged at 400g for 15 min at room temperature. The sperm pellet was then washed once by resuspension in 3 mL of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and centrifuged again at 400g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was removed, and the cell pellet was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Protein Extraction, Digestion, and Liquid Chromatography−Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC−MS/MS) Analyses MS/MS analysis of pooled sperm was performed using four different protocols based on a range of protein extraction procedures: (i) total cell lysate followed by a 1D SDS-PAGE separation (23 gel slices); (ii) separation of Triton X-100 soluble and insoluble fractions followed by a 1D SDS-PAGE separation (20 gel slices per fraction); (iii) total cell lysate, ingel digestion, and peptides analyzed by nano-LC with long gradient runs; and (iv) total cell lysate, in-gel digestion, and peptides fractionated by high-pH reversed-phase (Hp-RP) chromatography. For all protocols, tryptic peptides were analyzed by high-resolution MS instruments (Q-Exactive). These experiments were performed by the three proteomics platforms making up ProFI (Grenoble, Strasbourg, and Toulouse). A detailed description of the protein fractionation using Triton X-100, protein extraction and digestion, and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS) analyses performed in this study can be found in the Supporting Information. MS/MS Data Analysis Peak lists were generated from the original LC−MS/MS raw data using the Mascot Distiller tool (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science). The Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) was used to search all MS/MS spectra against a database composed of Homo sapiens protein entries from UniProtKB/SwissProt (release 2015-10-30, 84 362 protein coding genes sequences (canonical and isoforms)) and a list of contaminants frequently observed in proteomics analyses (the protein fasta file for these contaminants is available at ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP; it consists of 118 sequences). The following search parameters were applied: carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R, and one missed trypsin cleavage site was allowed. The mass tolerances for protein identification on MS and MS/MS peaks were 5 ppm and 25 mmu, respectively. The FDR was calculated by performing the search in concatenated target and decoy databases in Mascot. Peptides identified were validated by applying the target-decoy approach, using Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/), by adjusting the FDR to 1%, at PSM and protein levels. At peptide level, only the PSM with the best Mascot score was retained for each peptide sequence. Spectra identifying peptides in both target and decoy database searches were first assembled to allow competition between target and decoy peptides for each MS/MS query. Finally, the total number of validated hits was computed as Ntarget+Ndecoy, the number of false-positive hits was estimated as 2×Ndecoy, and the FDR was then computed as 2×Ndecoy/(Ntarget + Ndecoy). Proline software automatically determined a threshold Mascot e-value to filter peptides and computed the FDR as described so as to automatically adjust it to 1%. At protein level, a composite score was computed for each protein group based on the MudPIT scoring method implemented in Mascot: For each nonduplicate peptide identifying a protein group, the difference between its Mascot score and its homology threshold was computed, and these “score offsets” were then summed before adding them to the average homology (or identity) thresholds for the peptide. Therefore, less significant peptide matches contributed less to the total protein score. Protein groups were filtered by applying a threshold to this MudPIT protein score to obtain a final protein-level FDR of 1%. To optimize discrimination between true-positive and true-negative protein hits, the software applies a selection scheme approach by adjusting the FDR separately for the subset of proteins identified by more than one validated peptide and then for the single-peptide hits. In accordance with version 2.0.1 of the HPP data interpretation guidelines (Deutsch et al., submitted; http://www.thehpp.org/ guidelines/), individual result files from each of the five MS/ MS data sets were combined, and a procedure to produce a protein-level FDR threshold of 1% was reapplied. This combination of result files created a single identification data set from a set of identification results and was performed as follows: All PSMs identified and validated at 1% were merged to create a unique combination of amino acid sequences and a list of PTMs located on that sequence that were aggregated in a single “representative” PSM. The newly created PSMs were then grouped into proteins and protein families.41 The resulting data set therefore provides a nonredundant view of the identified proteins present in the original sample. Detection of Missing Proteins The sequence of each peptide identified was searched in all splicing isoform sequences present in neXtProt release 2016- 01-11 using the pepx program developed in-house (https:// github.com/calipho-sib/pepx). The method is based on a 6-mer amino acid index that is regenerated at each release; the 6 aa length was chosen because it significantly speeds up the mapping process. Leucine and isoleucine were considered equivalent. A peptide is considered to match an isoform sequence when all the 6-mers covering the peptide return the same sequence. Peptides were subsequently checked against the retrieved isoform sequence(s) to ensure an exact string match. All matches to splicing isoforms derived from a single entry were considered relevant for the identification of the entry. To further validate the identification of missing proteins, we performed a second round of peptide-to-protein mapping, taking into account the 2.5 million variants described in neXtProt (SNPs and disease mutations). Currently, pepx only considers a single amino acid substitution or deletion in the 6- mer; substitutions and deletions more than 1 aa in length, as well as insertions, are not taken into account. Consequently, pepx returns a match if single amino acid variations in the isoform sequence are spaced at least five amino acids apart. Peptides matching more than one entry when variants were taken into account were excluded as they are potentially not proteotypic. Data Availability All MS proteomics data, including reference files (readme, search database, .dat files), form a complete submission with the ProteomeXchange Consortium.15 Data were submitted via the PRIDE partner repository under data set identifiers PXD003947 and 10.6019/PXD003947. Additional MS-Based Validation (MS/MS Analysis of Synthetic Peptides, Comparison of Reference/Endogenous Fragmentation Spectra and LC−PRM Analysis) Synthetic heavy labeled peptides were purchased (crude PEPotec, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 36 “one-hit wonder” candidates selected based on visual inspection of PSMs. The 36 peptides initially identified were synthesized along with two additional predicted proteotypic peptides per protein when possible. Thus, a total of 100 peptides were synthesized (Supplementary Table 4). The labeled peptides corresponding to the 36 peptides initially identified were mixed together and analyzed by LC−MS/MS (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to acquire higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation spectra for comparison with the initial spectra in the closest possible conditions. All MS/MS spectrum pairs are shown in Supplementary Figure 1. Following this step, targeted assays using a PRM acquisition approach were developed on the same LC−MS/MS platform to target all 100 peptides, first in a total protein fraction prepared in stacking gel bands and subsequently in gel bands obtained from 1D SDS-PAGE separation of the Triton X-100 insoluble proteins fraction. See the Supporting Information for details of MS experiments. Data Mining to Select Missing Proteins for Further Characterization For each protein identified by MS, the tissue expression profile based on RNA sequencing analysis was retrieved from the Human Protein Atlas (HPA) portal (version 14) (www. proteinatlas.org/). The evolutionary conservation profile was determined by a BLAST analysis using UniProtKB “Reference Proteomes” as target. In addition, homologues were systematically searched for in a number of ciliated organisms from distant groups including Choanoflagellida (Salpingoeca, Monosiga), Chlorophyta (Micromonas, Volvox, Chlamydomonas), Ciliophora (Paramecium, Oxytricha, Stylonychia, Tetrahymena, Ichthyophthirius), Trypanosomatidae (Trypanosoma, Phytomonas, Leishmania, Angomonas, Leptomonas), Cryptophyta (Guillardia), Naegleria gruberi, and Flagellated protozoan (Bodo saltans). For each protein and all its orthologs, all existing names, synonyms, and identifiers were collected from appropriate model organism databases. These names were used to query PubMed and Google. Proteins to be further validated by immunohistochemistry were selected based on a combination of criteria including antibody quality, available immunohistochemistry data in Protein Atlas (version 14), phenotype of mutant organisms, predicted or experimental biological function, tissue localization, interacting partners, and phylogenetic profile. Uncharacterized proteins that are selectively expressed in testis or ciliated tissues and wellconserved in ciliated organisms interact with testis or ciliarelated proteins, for which knockout model organisms show a reproduction phenotype and for which high-quality antibodies from the HPA were available were considered the best candidates for further validation. Immunohistochemistry To confirm the germline expression of proteins of interest, we performed immunohistochemistry experiments on human testes fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin, as described.16 Normal human testes were collected at autopsy at Rennes University Hospital from HIV-1-negative cadavers. Paraffin-embedded tissues were cut into 4 μm thick slices, mounted on slides, and dried at 58 °C for 60 min. Immunohistochemical staining, using the Ventana DABMap and OMNIMap detection kit (Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, USA), was performed on a Discovery Automated IHC stainer. Antigen retrieval was performed using proprietary Ventana Tris-based buffer solution, CC1, at 95 to 100 °C for 48 min. Tissue sections were then saturated for 1 h with 5% BSA in TBS, and endogenous peroxidase was blocked with Inhibitor-D, 3% H2O2, (Ventana) for 8 min at 37 °C. After rinsing in TBS, slides were incubated at 37 °C for 60 min with polyclonal rabbit antibodies specific for the selected missing proteins (Atlas Antibodies) diluted in TBS containing 0.2% Tween 20 (v/v) and 3% BSA (TBST-BSA). The antibody dilutions used are listed in Supplementary Table 6. Nonimmune rabbit serum (1:1000) was used as a negative control. After several washes in TBS, sections were incubated for 16 min with a biotinylated goat antirabbit antibody (Roche) at a final dilution of 1:500 in TBST-BSA. Signal was enhanced using the Ventana DABMap Kit or Ventana OMNIMap kit. Sections were then counterstained for 16 min with hematoxylin (commercial solution, Microm) and for 4 min with bluing reagent (commercial solution, Microm) before rinsing with Milli-Q water. After removal from the instrument, slides were manually dehydrated and mounted in Eukitt (Labnord, Villeneuve d’Ascq, France). Finally, immunohistology images were obtained using NDP.Scan acquisition software (v2.5, Hamamatsu) and visualized with NDP.View2 software (Hamamatsu). Representative images are shown.

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

