=== TITLE ===
Combined Proteome and Eicosanoid Profiling Approach for Revealing Implications of Human Fibroblasts in Chronic Inflammation

=== ABSTRACT ===
During inflammation, proteins and lipids act in a concerted fashion, calling for combined analyses. Fibroblasts are powerful mediators of chronic inflammation. However, little is known about eicosanoid formation by human fibroblasts. The aim of this study was to analyze the formation of the most relevant inflammation mediators including proteins and lipids in human fibroblasts upon inflammatory stimulation and subsequent treatment with dexamethasone, a powerful antiphlogistic drug. Label-free quantification was applied for proteome profiling, while an in-house established data-dependent analysis method based on high-resolution mass spectrometry was applied for eicosadomics. Furthermore, a set of 188 metabolites was determined by targeted analysis. The secretion of 40 proteins including cytokines, proteases, and other inflammation agonists as well as 14 proinflammatory and nine anti-inflammatory eicosanoids was found significantly induced, while several acylcarnithins and sphingomyelins were found significantly downregulated upon inflammatory stimulation. Treatment with dexamethasone downregulated most cytokines and proteases, abrogated the formation of pro- but also anti-inflammatory eicosanoids, and restored normal levels of acylcarnithins but not of sphingomyelins. In addition, the chemokines CXCL1, CXCL5, CXCL6, and complement C3, known to contribute to chronic inflammation, were not counter-regulated by dexamethasone. Similar findings were obtained with human mesenchymal stem cells, and results were confirmed by targeted analysis with multiple reaction monitoring. Comparative proteome profiling regarding other cells demonstrated cell-type-specific synthesis of, among others, eicosanoid-forming enzymes as well as relevant transcription factors, allowing us to better understand cell-type-specific regulation of inflammation mediators and shedding new light on the role of fibroblasts in chronic inflammation.


=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Cell Culture

Normal human dermal fibroblasts (NHDF), kindly provided by Verena Paulitschke, were cultured as previously described. (12) Experiments were performed with cells at same passages (20–22) for three biological replicates each of control and treated cells, using 1.5 × 106 cells per 25 cm2 culture flask. Control cells were incubated for 24 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. In parallel, inflammatory stimulated NHDF were obtained by treating cells with 10 ng/mL of IL-1β (Sigma-Aldrich, Vienna, Austria) for 24 h, based on experience from previous studies. (20-22) One aliquot of stimulated cells was additionally treated with 100 ng/mL of dexamethasone (Sigma-Aldrich) 1 h after stimulation and cultured like the other for additional 23 h. Thereafter, all cells were cultured for additional 6 h in 3 mL of serum-free medium to obtain the fraction of secreted proteins. (23) Similar experiments were performed with NHDF derived from another donor at passage 6–7 (Lonza, France, Amboise) and human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC, passage 4–5; Lonza). hMSC were cultured in mesenchymal stem cell growth medium (Lonza) supplemented with the associated Bulletkit and 100U/mL penicillin/streptomycin (ATCC/LGC Standards, London, U.K.). All further processing steps and shotgun proteomics were done in the same way as for NHDF.
Extraction of Eicosanoids

Supernatants from cell culture (3 mL each) were collected each in an individual 15 mL falcon tube. Concentrations of 100 nM of each of the internal standards (PGE2-d4, 15S-HETE-d8, and PGF2a-d4; from Cayman Europe, Tallinn, Estonia) were added. After protein precipitation, ethanol (EtOH) was evaporated in a SpeedVac at 35 °C for 25 min until the original sample volume—before protein precipitation—was restored. Samples were then diluted 1:3 with MS grade water and extracted using 30 mg/mL StrataX solid-phase extraction (SPE) columns (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, U.S.A.). Columns were conditioned and equilibrated with HiPerSolv grade methanol (MeOH; VWR International, Vienna, Austria) and liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC–MS) grade water (Sigma-Aldrich), respectively. After sample loading, the columns were washed with 15% MeOH, and eicosanoids were eluted with 1 mL of acetonitrile (ACN, VWR International), MeOH, and formic acid (FA; Sigma-Aldrich) (ACN/MeOH/FA, 49:49:2). Solvents were evaporated by vacuum centrifugation, and lipids were dissolved in 200 μL of reconstitution buffer (ACN/H2O/FA, 30:70:0.02).
LC–MS Method for Eicosanoids

Samples were pipetted into 200 μL glass inserts. All eluents such as mobile phase A (H2O/FA, 100:0.02) and mobile phase B (ACN/MeOH/FA, 90:10:0.02) were degassed prior to their usage. Using an Infinity 1290 ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatograph (UHPLC) (Agilent Technologies Austria GmbH, Vienna, Austria), a 40 min gradient flow method was applied using a Kinetex 2.1 mm × 15 cm, 2.6 μm, C18, 100 Å reversed-phase column (Phenomenex); the flow rate was set to 250 μL/min, and a gradient was applied (0–2 min, 5% mobile phase B; 2–28 min, 5–85% mobile phase B; 28–35 min, 95% mobile phase B; re-equilibration with 5% mobile phase B). All samples (20 μL injected) were analyzed in technical duplicates. Mass spectrometric detection was performed with a Q Exactive orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the HESI source to achieve negative ion mode ionization. MS scans were performed with an m/z range from 250 to 750 and a resolution of 35 000 (at m/z = 300). A lock mass was set; drift was ±5 ppm over all experiments. MS/MS scans of the six most abundant ions were achieved through higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and analyzed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17 500 (at m/z = 300). Data have been converted into mzXML to be readable independent of vendor-specific software and made freely available to download following the link: https://anchem.univie.ac.at/ueber-uns/internes/geschuetzt/download9156546/.
Eicosanoid Data Interpretation

Raw files generated by the Q Exactive orbitrap were analyzed and assessed manually using Thermo Xcalibur 2.2 Sp1.48 (Qual browser). Candidate ions were extracted and further evaluated using an in-house developed data processing software (programmed by AT). Libraries from Lipid Maps depository were used and implemented as references. (24, 25)
Extraction and Digestion of Proteins from Secretomes, Cytoplasm, and Nuclear Extracts

Secreted proteins were prepared by overnight precipitation with ethanol at −20 °C of three cell supernatants each of control, activated, and dexamethasone-treated NHDF. After centrifugation, proteins were dissolved in sample buffer (7.5 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100 mM dithiothreitol). In case of dexamethasone-treated NHDF, two biological replicates were further processed in order to obtain cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins, proceeding as previously described. (17) In short, cells were lysed in isotonic lysis buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors by applying mechanical shear stress. Cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins were extracted and dissolved in sample buffer. Protein concentrations were determined by means of a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Germany). Thereafter, in-solution digestion of proteins was performed with trypsin (Roche Diagnostics, Germany).
LC–MS Method for Proteins

Samples were solubilized in 5 μL of 30% FA containing 10 fmol each of four synthetic standard peptides and diluted with 40 μL of mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, and 0.1% FA). An amount of 10 μL was injected into the nano-HPLC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000) loading peptides on a 2 cm × 75 μm C18 Pepmap100 precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min using mobile phase A. Peptides were then eluted to a 50 cm × 75 μm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min, using a gradient from 8% to 40% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 95 min for secreted proteins, and over 235 min for cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins. The nano-HPLC system was coupled to a Q Exactive orbitrap with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400 to 1400 at a resolution of 70 000 (at m/z = 200), MS/MS scans at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z = 200), using a top 8 method for secreted proteins and a top 12 method for cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins and applying HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy.
Protein Data Interpretation

Identification of proteins and label-free quantification (LFQ) were performed using the MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 software including the Andromeda search engine and the Perseus statistical analysis package version 1.5.2.3, (26, 27) searching against the UniProt database for human proteins (version 102014). A minimum of two peptide identifications, at least one of them unique, was required for positive protein identification. For peptides and proteins, a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 0.01 was applied. Protein regulation was determined by comparing the LFQ values for each individual protein in the different samples using Perseus, normalizing to the same initial protein amount of 20 μg. Changes in protein abundance values (Supporting Information Tables S1–S3) were determined by a two-sided t test, considering proteins as significantly regulated when the abundance difference was at least 2-fold with p < 0.05. Proteins described in the manuscript had further a global FDR < 0.05 determined by a permutation-based method. (28, 29) The proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (30) partner repository with the identifier PXD003963, 3965, 3966, 3967, and 3971. Using Perseus, a principle component analysis (PCA) was performed. Additionally, euclidean distance and average linkage clustering was used for hierarchical clustering of z-scored LFQ values. Enrichment analysis was based on gene ontology terms for biological processes. Furthermore, for selected proteins, heat maps representing LFQ values determined in different cells were generated using an R script. (31) To this end, raw data of LFQ values determined in NHDF were used and compared to similar data previously obtained from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). (12, 17)
Targeted Proteomics

Targeted analysis using multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) was performed for selected proteins secreted by NHDF, measuring five biological replicates per cell state, each as technical triplicate. An Agilent 6490 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer coupled to a nano-chip-LC Agilent Infinity series HPLC1290 system was used. Method development for MRM was based on shotgun data, as recently described. (21) Optimized transitions are listed in Supporting Information Table S4. After injection of 1 μL of sample to the nano-LC system, peptides were separated by applying a 20 min gradient from 8% to 30% solvent B (99.8% ACN; 0.2% FA). Data evaluation was done using Skyline software (version 3.1) (32) and was based on manual peak selection and exportation of the total peak area for each peptide. Statistical analysis of the data was performed with Excel, normalizing data to the peak areas of four standard peptides, the percentage of sample volume used for digestion, and the number of cells used per sample. (21)
Targeted Metabolomics

Targeted metabolomics was performed using AbsoluteIDQ p180 kits (Biocrates Life Sciences AG, Innsbruck, Austria). The kit allows the identification and (semi)quantitation of metabolites including acylcarnitines, amino acids, and biogenic amines, the sum of hexoses, sphingolipids, and glycerophospholipids by LC and flow injection analysis (FIA) MRM. Samples were analyzed on an AB SCIEX Trap 4000 mass spectrometer operated with Analyst 1.6.2 (AB SCIEX), using an Agilent 1200 RR HPLC system with a chromatographic column from Biocrates. Cell lysates of control, inflammatory-activated, and dexamethasone-treated inflammatory-activated NHDF, additional blanks, calibration standards, and quality controls were prepared according to the user manual. All amino acids and biogenic amines were derivatized with phenylisothiocyanate. The experiments were validated with the supplied software (MetIDQ, version 5-4-8-DB100-Boron-2607, Biocrates Life Sciences, and Innsbruck, Austria), and 10 metabolites did not pass quality control, resulting in 178 metabolites being finally determined. The excluded metabolites were Asp, Gly, Ac-Orn, ADMA, SDMA, PEA, DOPA, histamine, serotonin, and putrescine. Quality controls were analyzed every 20th sample. Amino acids and biogenic amines were quantified by constructing five-point calibration curves and showed correlation coefficients between 0.9764 (Arg) and 0.9997 (Thr).

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

