=== TITLE ===
The Proteome of Primary Prostate Cancer

=== ABSTRACT ===
Background
Clinical management of the prostate needs improved prognostic tests and treatment strategies. Because proteins are the ultimate effectors of most cellular reactions, are targets for drug actions and constitute potential biomarkers; a quantitative systemic overview of the proteome changes occurring during prostate cancer (PCa) initiation and progression can result in clinically relevant discoveries.
Objectives
To study cellular processes altered in PCa using system-wide quantitative analysis of changes in protein expression in clinical samples and to identify prognostic biomarkers for disease aggressiveness.
Design, setting, and participants
Mass spectrometry was used for genome-scale quantitative proteomic profiling of 28 prostate tumors (Gleason score 6–9) and neighboring nonmalignant tissue in eight cases, obtained from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded prostatectomy samples. Two independent cohorts of PCa patients (summing 752 cases) managed by expectancy were used for immunohistochemical evaluation of proneuropeptide-Y (pro-NPY) as a prognostic biomarker.
Results and limitations
Over 9000 proteins were identified as expressed in the human prostate. Tumor tissue exhibited elevated expression of proteins involved in multiple anabolic processes including fatty acid and protein synthesis, ribosomal biogenesis and protein secretion but no overt evidence of increased proliferation was observed. Tumors also showed increased levels of mitochondrial proteins, which was associated with elevated oxidative phosphorylation capacity measured in situ. Molecular analysis indicated that some of the proteins overexpressed in tumors, such as carnitine palmitoyltransferase 2 (CPT2, fatty acid transporter), coatomer protein complex, subunit alpha (COPA, vesicle secretion), and mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase 1 and 2 (MSK1/2, protein kinase) regulate the proliferation of PCa cells. Additionally, pro-NPY was found overexpressed in PCa (5-fold, p < 0.05), but largely absent in other solid tumor types. Pro-NPY expression, alone or in combination with the ERG status of the tumor, was associated with an increased risk of PCa specific mortality, especially in patients with Gleason score ≤ 7 tumors.
Conclusions
This study represents the first system-wide quantitative analysis of proteome changes associated to localized prostate cancer and as such constitutes a valuable resource for understanding the complex metabolic changes occurring in this disease. We also demonstrated that pro-NPY, a protein that showed differential expression between high and low risk tumors in our proteomic analysis, is also a PCa specific prognostic biomarker associated with increased risk for disease specific death in patients carrying low risk tumors.
Patient summary
The identification of proteins whose expression change in prostate cancer provides novel mechanistic information related to the disease etiology. We hope that future studies will prove the value of this proteome dataset for development of novel therapies and biomarkers.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
2.1. Experimental design
Whole cell protein extracts were purified from 28 tumor and eight nonmalignant FFPE radical prostatectomy specimens. Protein extracts were mixed in 1:1 ratio with an isotopically labeled standard obtained from four prostate-derived cells lines (Super-SILAC) to improve quantification accuracy [12]. Tryptic peptides were analyzed using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) (Fig. 1A). Validation of the differentially expressed proteins was carried out in situ using histochemistry/immunohistochemistry and in vitro in cell experiments to evaluate functionality.

Download: Download high-res image (1MB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Workflow for the quantitative mass spectrometry analysis of formalin-fixed paraffin embedded prostatectomy samples. (A) Epithelium-derived LNCaP (androgen sensitive, AR+), 22rv1 (androgen insensitive, AR+), and PC3 (androgen insensitive, AR-) cells, and stroma-derived WPMY-1 cells were metabolically labeled with heavy arginine and lysine for 10 generations. Whole cell protein extracts of each cell line were mixed in the indicated proportions (%) to create the spike-in standard. Whole protein extracts from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded prostatectomy samples were mixed with the standard in a 1:1 ratio. Combined extracts were digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides were further fractionated by strong anionic exchange to simplify the complexity of the peptide mixture. Each fraction was analyzed by online liquid chromatography–Mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry using an Exactive-Q mass spectrometer. Peptides were identified and quantified using MaxQuant software suit. (B) Scatter plot of the relative abundance of all proteins shown as the log10 of the median intensity of the tumors (n = 28) and the benign neighboring prostate tissue (controls; n = 8). Relative density is color-coded and the names of several prostate cancer relevant proteins are indicated. (C) Number of proteins with valid ratios: light (from prostatectomy origin)/heavy (from cell line origin) for each tumor and control sample.

FASP = filter-aided sample preparation; FFEP = formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded; LC-MS/MS = liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry; SAX = strong anion exchange; SILAC = stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture.
2.2. Proteomic analysis
Protein extracts of stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) labeled LNCaP, PC-3, 22rv1, and WPMY-1 cells were mixed in a 27:27:27:19 ratio and used as spike-in standard. Whole protein extracts were purified from FFPE specimens as previously described [13]. Twenty-five micrograms to 40 μg of protein was mixed in equimolar amounts with the isotopicaly labeled protein standard [12] and trypsin digested following the filter-aid sample preparation methodology [13]. Forty micrograms from the resulting tryptic peptides were fractionated with strong anion exchange chromatography into six fractions to reduce sample complexity and maximize depth of proteome coverage [13]. Each fraction was then analyzed with LC-MS/MS on the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA). Peptides were separated using a 4-h gradient of water:acetonitrile, on a 30 cm C18 column. MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000. MS/MS spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode, after higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation, at a resolution of 17,500 [14]. The obtained mass spectrometric raw data were analyzed in the MaxQuant environment, version 1.3.7.1 [15] with the integrated Andromeda searching engine and false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off for peptide identification of 0.1 [16] (Fig. 1A). Proteins were identified by searching MS/MS data against the human proteome sequences from UniProt (UniprotKB, 2012). Normalized light (tissue) to heavy (SILAC standard) intensity ratios were averaged for tumor and control samples. Differences of the mean were evaluated by Student t test followed by Benjamini–Hochberg correction for multiple testing. FDR values smaller than 0.1 were considered statistically significant. No correction was applied when tumors were divided by their Gleason scores (GS) and p values smaller than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
2.3. Clinical material
A discovery cohort of FFPE radical prostatectomy samples was selected from specimens collected at the Umeå University Hospital between 2004 and 2007 (approval by Research Ethics Board Dnr 03-482) to include GS 6–9 tumors (Supplementary Table 1). Nonmalignant tissue (control tissue) without high grade of inflammation, atrophy, or prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and PCa of different GSs were located in hematoxylin/eosin-stained whole mount sections. Epithelial-rich areas (approximately 25 mm2) of control and PCa tissue in the peripheral prostate zone were selected for proteomic analysis and macro-dissected into extraction tubes from 20 microtome sections of 10 μm each (Supplementary Table 1). Corresponding FFPE whole mount sections where used for immunohistochemistry (IHC) validation of NDUFAF1, ACAD9, THOC7, and COPA. Cytochrome histochemistry was performed using fresh-frozen specimens that had been punched out with a 0.5 cm steel cylinder from an additional set of radical prostatectomies, within 30 min after surgery.
Evaluation cohort (Supplementary Table 7): tissue microarray (TMA) data was from a historical cohort of 289 men with PCa [17], detected after (transurethral resection of the prostate) TURP due to voiding symptoms, between 1975–1991, in Västerås, Sweden. Patients without metastases at diagnosis and followed with expectancy (“watchful waiting”) after TURP were included in the survival analysis (n = 196).
Validation cohort (Supplementary Table 7): TMA data from a historical cohort of men diagnosed with incidental PCa in the Örebro and the Southeast health care region, Sweden, through TURP procedure or adenoma enucleation (ie, T1a-b tumors) [18]. Patients with early-stage/localized PCa were followed by watchful waiting. TMA included men who died from PCa (n = 171) and men who survived at least 10 yr following their diagnosis without any progress of their disease (n = 292 after exclusion criteria).
A cohort of 122 patients [19] treated with radical prostatectomy at the Department of Urology, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden was used to study pro-NPY expression in relation with biochemical recurrence. Of the 122, 94 cases had follow-up information available and in eight of those, TMA material was exhausted. Clinical studies were approved by the pertinent Ethics Committees (at Lund, Umeå, and Örebro Universities) and the Helsinki Declaration of Human Rights was strictly observed.
2.4. Cytochrome c oxidase activity
Cytochrome c oxidase activity was performed as previously described [20] (Supplementary Materials and methods).

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

