=== TITLE ===
Temporal proteomics of NGF-TrkA signaling identifies an inhibitory role for the E3 ligase Cbl-b in neuroblastoma cell differentiation

=== ABSTRACT ===
SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells respond to nerve growth factor (NGF)–mediated activation of the tropomyosin-related kinase A (TrkA) with neurite outgrowth, thereby providing a model to study neuronal differentiation. We performed a time-resolved analysis of NGF-TrkA signaling in neuroblastoma cells using mass spectrometry–based quantitative proteomics. The combination of interactome, phosphoproteome, and proteome data provided temporal insights into the molecular events downstream of NGF binding to TrkA. We showed that upon NGF stimulation, TrkA recruits the E3 ubiquitin ligase Cbl-b, which then becomes phosphorylated and ubiquitylated and decreases in abundance. We also found that recruitment of Cbl-b promotes TrkA ubiquitylation and degradation. Furthermore, the amount of phosphorylation of the kinase ERK and neurite outgrowth increased upon Cbl-b depletion in several neuroblastoma cell lines. Our findings suggest that Cbl-b limits NGF-TrkA signaling to control the length of neurites.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Reagents The following commercial reagents were used: Tet hydrochloride and CHX (Sigma-Aldrich); Murine 2.5S Nerve Growth Factor (Promega); the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 (Cell Signaling Technology); the MEK inhibitor U0126 (Cayman Chemical Company); the RSK inhibitor BID1870, the JNK inhibitor JNK-IN-8, and the PKC inhibitor Gö6979 (Calbiochem); the MEK5/ERK5 inhibitor BIX02189, the p38 inhibitor BIRB796, and the GSK3 inhibitor CHIR99021 (Selleckchem). Stock solutions for all in- hibitors were prepared in DMSO and stored at−20°C. Antibodies against phosphorylated TrkA (raised in rabbit against Tyr674/675 , corresponding to Tyr680/681 for TrkA isoform II), TrkA, phosphorylated or total PLCg (raised in rabbit), phosphorylated or total AKT (raised in rabbit), phos- phorylated or total ERK1/2 (raised in mouse or rabbit, respectively), phosphoryl- ated or total ERK5 (raised in rabbit), phosphorylated or total ATF-2 (raised in rabbit), phosphorylated or total GSK3 (raised in rabbit), phosphorylated or total HSP27 (raised in rabbit or mouse, respectively), ALK, DUSP4, BIP (GRP78), and lamin A/C (all raised in rabbit) were purchased from Cell Signaling Tech- nology. Antibody against vinculin (raised in mouse) was from Sigma-Aldrich. Antibodies against Cbl-b and ubiquitin (P4D1) (both raised in mouse), Spry4, Lyn, and Cbl (C-15) (each raised in rabbit) used in immunoprecipitation assays were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Antibodies to GAP43, TrkA, and WNK2 (each raised in rabbit) and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and Shc (both raised in mouse) used in immunoprecipitations were from Abcam. Antibodies to Grb2 and c-Cbl (both mouse) were from BD Bio- sciences, and that to phosphotyrosine (4G10, raised in mouse) used in immuno- precipitations was from EMD Millipore. The antibody to GAREM2 (raised in rabbit) was provided by H. Konishi (University of Hiroshima, Hiroshima, Japan) and was previously described (35). Secondary horseradish peroxidase– conjugated antibodies against rabbit or mouse immunoglobulin G (IgG) and raised in goat were from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories. Cell culture The human neuroblastoma cell lines SH-SY5Y, CLBGA, and NB1 were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco), 2 mM L-glutamine (Gibco), and penicillin (100 U/ml) and strepto- mycin (100 mg/ml) (Gibco). The CLBGA and NB1 cell lines were a gift from F. Speleman (University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium). The rat pheochro- mocytoma PC12 cell line was cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% horse serum (Gibco), 5% fetal bovine serum (Gibco), 2 mM L-glutamine (Gibco), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Gibco), and penicillin (100 U/ml) and streptomycin (100 mg/ml) (Gibco). PC12 cells were cultivated on BioCoat Collagen I Cellware (Corning Incorporated). Generation and maintenance of stable cell lines The number of cell lines with high endogenous TrkA expression is limited, and constitutive ectopic expression of TrkA in a neuroblastoma setting is often associated with receptor autophosphorylation and loss of expression upon long-term culture (64). We therefore developed a Tet-inducible system for TrkA expression. SH-SY5Y cells were stably transfected with the plas- mid for expression of the Tet repressor (TR) pcDNA6/TR (Invitrogen), and single cell clones were obtained after selection in the presence of blasticidin (7.5 mg/ml) (Invitrogen). A clone with high expression of TR resulted in the cell line SH-SY5Y-TR and was then stably transfected with the TrkA expres- sion plasmid pT-REx-DEST30-TrkA. The sequence for TrkA corresponded to that of TrkA isoform II, which is specifically expressed in neuronal cells (65). The sequence of codon-optimized TrkA complementary DNA (cDNA), which did not alter the wild-type TrkA amino acids, was cloned into a Tet- inducible vector pT-REx-DEST30 (Invitrogen) as previously described (http://tinyurl.com/llp9k8u). Single cell clones were generated by antibiotic selection using blasticidin (7.5 mg/ml) and G418 (500 mg/ml) (Sigma-Aldrich). A clone with the ability to express a high amount of TrkA upon Tet induction resulted in the cell line SH-SY5Y-TR-TrkA. Culturing conditions for SH- SY5Y-TR and SH-SY5Y-TR-TrkA were similar to parental SH-SY5Y with the addition of their respective selection antibiotics. All cell lines were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere at 5% CO2. Cell stimulation, lysis, and Western blotting Cells were cultured in six-well plates in complete medium and serum- starved for 6 hours in serum-free medium before short-term (5 to 120 min) stimulation with NGF (100 ng/ml). Whenever the SH-SY5Y-TR-TrkA cell line was used, TrkA expression was always induced using Tet (1 mg/ml) 48 hours before NGF stimulation unless otherwise stated. To block for new protein synthesis, the translational inhibitor CHX (Sigma-Aldrich) was used (20 mg/ml), and cells were preincubated for 1 hour before NGF stimulation. Whole-cell extracts were generated by lysing the cells in modified radio- immunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer [50 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate with the addition of 5 mM b-glycerophosphate, 5 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium ortho- vanadate, and 1 Complete Inhibitor Cocktail tablet per 10 ml (Roche)]. Pro- tein concentration was determined using Bio-Rad Bradford reagent. Proteins (20 to 80 mg per lane) were resolved by SDS-PAGE using 4 to 12% bis-tris gradient gels (NuPAGE, Invitrogen) and MOPS buffer and transferred onto Whatman Protran nitrocellulose membranes (Sigma-Aldrich). Membranes were stained for total protein amounts with Ponceau S (Sigma-Aldrich) and blocked with phosphate-buffered saline and 0.1% Tween 20 containing either 5% skim milk powder (Sigma-Aldrich) or 5% albumin from bovine serum (Sigma-Aldrich) before incubating with the primary antibodies as indicated. Incubation with primary antibodies was per- formed overnight at 4°C and followed by 1 hour of incubation with species- specific peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies. The Novex ECL Chemiluminescent Substrate Reagent Kit (Invitrogen) was used to visualize the protein bands, and bands were detected by exposure to Hyperfilm (Amersham, GE Healthcare). To detect multiple proteins, the antibodies were removed from the membrane in stripping buffer [500 mM glycine (pH 2.5)], washed, and then reprobed with antibodies against the corresponding proteins. Western blot analyses were performed on at least three independent sets of lysates with similar results. Densitometric analysis was performed with the ImageJ software. Immunoprecipitation Cell extracts for immunoprecipitation were prepared using immuno- precipitation lysis buffer containing 50 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM calcium chloride, 1% Triton X-100 with the addition of 5 mM b-glycerophosphate, 5 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, and one Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail tablet (Roche) per 10-ml so- lution. Cell lysates (1 to 2 mg) were precleared with protein G–Sepharose (Invitrogen) and rabbit or mouse IgG from serum (Sigma-Aldrich) depending on the species of antibody used for immunoprecipitation. Lysates were then incubated overnight at 4°C with TrkA antibody (Abcam), phosphotyrosine antibody (4G10; EMD Millipore), and Cbl-b or Cbl antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) with subsequent binding to protein G–Sepharose for 1 hour. Af- ter five washes with lysis buffer, the bound proteins were eluted by boiling in SDS sample buffer, resolved by SDS-PAGE, and analyzed by Western blotting. Neurite outgrowth assay For experiments including chemical inhibitors, cells were seeded in six-well plates in complete medium and serum-starved for 6 hours in serum-free me- dium before NGF stimulation (100 ng/ml) for 24 hours. Before NGF stim- ulation, cells were preincubated for 30 min with chemical inhibitors at the following concentrations: 20 mM LY294002, 20 mM U0126, 2 mM BID1870, 5 mM JNK-IN-8, 10 nM Gö6979, 5 mM BIX02189, 10 mM BIRB796, and 3 mM CHIR99021; each was determined to be the lowest concentration required to inhibit the primary target kinase or a downstream target. Control cells were preincubated with DMSO (0.001%). Neurite outgrowth was evaluated 24 hours after stimulation. When cells were treated with NGF alone or transfected with siRNA, cells were seeded in six-well plates in complete medium (unless otherwise indicated), and images were obtained after treatment with NGF at the indicated time points or 3 days after transfection, respectively. Each condition was performed in triplicate. Images were obtained using a phase-contrast microscope (DM1000, Leica) equipped with a DFC420C camera (Leica). Neurite-bearing cells were eval- uated on at least five images for each condition in triplicate, and cells with neurites longer than the length of two cell bodies were manually counted. RNA interference and transfection SH-SY5Y, SH-SY5Y-TR-TrkA, CLBGA, NB1, and PC12 cells were trans- fected using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Invitrogen) according to the manu- facturer’s instructions, and all the assays were performed 48 to 72 hours after transfection. Double-stranded Stealth siRNA oligonucleotides targeting hu- man CBLB (sequence #1: 5′-UCAUCCCACCCUGUUUCCCUGAAUU- 3′; sequence #2: 5′-GGUCCAUCUUCAGAGAAGAAAUCAA-3′; sequence #3: 5′-CAUGGGAGAGGGUUAUGCCUUUGAA-3′), human CBL (sequence #1: 5′-CCAGCAGAUUGAUAGCUGUACGUAU-3′; sequence #2: 5′-GCGGAGAAUCAACUCUGAACGGAAA-3′; sequence #3: 5′-CCUACCAGGACAUCCAGAAAGCUUU-3′), and rat CBLB (sequence #1: 5′-GGAAUCUCACAAAGCUGUCCCUUAU-3; sequence #2: 5′-GGGACGGCAAUAUCCUACAGACCAU-3′; sequence #3: 5′ - CCGAAGUCUUCUCCAUGCAUGGUUA-3′) were purchased from Invi- trogen. Cells were transfected with a mixture of all three CBLB- or CBL-targeting siRNA duplexes for a final concentration of 100 nM unless otherwise stated. As negative control, Stealth RNAi siRNA GFP (green fluorescent protein) Reporter Control duplex (Invitrogen) was used at a final concentration of 100 nM. Silencing of gene expression was monitored by Western blotting of cell lysates with an antibody against Cbl-b, recognizing Cbl-b of both hu- man and rat origin or an antibody against Cbl. Quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction Total RNA was isolated using the Qiagen RNeasy kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Total RNA was quantified using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo), and cDNA was synthesized from 1 mg of total RNA using the QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen). Re- verse transcription reactions were diluted 1:5 with H2O and stored at −20°C. Two microliters of each sample was mixed with Brilliant II SYBR Green QPCR Master Mix (Agilent Technologies) according to the manu- facturer’s instructions. The following primers (250 nM final concentration) were used for qPCR (quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction): GAPDH: 5′-CAGCGACACCCACTCCTCCA-3′ (for- ward) and 5′-GCTGGTGGTCCAGGGGTCTT-3′ (reverse) (Eurofins MWG Operon); CBLB: 5′-TGCCGATGCTAGACTTGGACGA-3′ (for- ward) and 5′-TGATGTGACTGGTGAGTTCTGCC-3′ (reverse); CBL: 5′-GCACGTTCAGTC TGGATACC TC-3′ (forward) and 5′ - GCAGTTTTGGCACAGGAAGAGG-3′ (reverse) (OriGene Technolo- gies). qPCR was performed using a Stratagene Mx3005P instrument with the following conditions: 10 min at 95°C followed by 40 cycles of 30 s at 95°C, 1 min at 55°C, and 1 min at 72°C. Experimental data were analyzed with MxPro software. Each sample was measured in technical triplicates, and each condition in biological triplicates. Quantification is presented as the ratio between the amount of target gene and the amount of GAPDH mRNA in each sample and relative to the untreated control using the ∆∆Ct method (66). SILAC labeling For quantitative MS-based proteomics, SH-SY5Y-TR-TrkA and PC12 cells were labeled in SILAC RPMI (PAA Laboratories GmbH) supplemented with 10 or 15% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Sigma), respectively, 2 mM L-glutamine (Gibco), penicillin (100 U/ml), and streptomycin (100 mg/ml) for at least 2 weeks to ensure complete incorporation of amino acids. Three cell populations were obtained: one labeled with natural variants of the amino acids (light label; Lys0, Arg0) (Sigma), the second labeled with me- dium variants of amino acids {L-[2H4]Lys (+4) and L-[13C6]Arg (+6)} (Lys4, Arg6), and the third labeled with heavy variants of the amino acids {L-[13C6,15N2]Lys (+8) and L-[13C6,15N4]Arg (+10)} (Lys8, Arg10). Me- dium and heavy variants of amino acids were purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories. Sample preparation for MS analysis For strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography and TiO2-based phos- phopeptide enrichment, cells from light, medium, and heavy SILAC conditions were lysed separately at 4°C in ice-cold modified RIPA buffer [50 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate with the addition of 5 mM b-glycerophosphate, 5 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, and one Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail tablet (Roche) per 50 ml of solution]. Proteins were pre- cipitated overnight at−20°C in fourfold excess of ice-cold acetone. The acetone-precipitated proteins were solubilized in denaturation buffer [10 mM Hepes (pH 8.0), 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea], and 8 mg of protein from each SILAC condition was mixed 1:1:1. Proteins were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol for 60 min, alkylated with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide for 60 min, and digested initially with endoproteinase Lys-C for 3 hours (Wako), diluted fourfold with Milli-Q, and then digested with trypsin (mod- ified sequencing grade, Sigma) overnight. All the steps were performed at room temperature. Enzyme activity was quenched by acidification of the samples with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptide mixture was desalted and concentrated on a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters) and eluted with 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Peptide fractionation by SCX chromatography (67) was performed in a 1-ml Resource S column (GE Healthcare) on an ÄKTA FPLC system (GE Healthcare). The eluted peptide mixture was loaded di- rectly onto a 10-ml injection loop and separated by a linear gradient from 100% SCX buffer A [5 mM KH2PO4 (pH 2.7), 30% ACN] to 30% SCX buffer B [5 mM KH2PO4 (pH 2.7), 350 mM KCl, 30% ACN] for 30 min, followed by isocratic (100%) buffer B for 6 min at a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min. Fractions of 2 ml were collected, of which some were pooled. Phosphopep- tides were enriched using titansphere chromatography essentially as described previously (67). Briefly, titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads (10 mm, Titansphere, GL Sciences) were incubated with a solution of 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) (20 mg/ml) (Sigma-Aldrich) in 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA for 30 min at room temperature. About 1 mg of TiO2-DHB beads was added to each SCX fraction or fraction pool and incubated under rotation for 30 min at room tem- perature. Early SCX fractions, mostly enriched in phosphopeptides, were in- cubated twice with TiO2-DHB beads for better coverage. The beads were washed once with SCX buffer B and once with 40% ACN, 0.5% TFA, and transferred in 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid on top of a C8 stage tip. The bound phosphopeptides were eluted directly into a 96-well plate by 5% NH4OH followed by 10% NH4OH, 25% ACN. The eluate was immediately concen- trated in a SpeedVac at 60°C and acidified with 5% ACN, 1% TFA. Each sample was then desalted and concentrated on a C18 stage tip. For Coomassie staining and in-gel digestion, cells from light, medium, and heavy SILAC conditions were lysed separately at 4°C in immuno- precipitation lysis buffer and modified RIPA for interactome and proteome samples, respectively. For the interactome analysis, TrkA was immunopre- cipitated from 7 mg of protein in parallel for each SILAC condition before immunoprecipitation eluates were combined, and for proteome analysis, 50 mg of protein amounts from each SILAC condition was mixed before SDS-PAGE. The SILAC mixes were fractionated on 4 to 12% bis-tris gradient gels (Invi- trogen) and stained with the Colloidal Blue Kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Gel lanes were divided into 5 (interactome) or 10 (proteome) different slices, and each gel slice was cut into 1-mm3 cubes. Gel slices were destained with 50% ethanol in 25 mM ammonium bi- carbonate solution and dehydrated with absolute ethanol. Proteins were di- gested with trypsin (modified sequencing grade, Sigma) overnight. Trypsin activity was quenched by acidification with TFA, and peptides were extracted from the gel pieces with increasing concentrations of acetonitrile in 0.5% ace- tic acid. Organic solvent was evaporated in a SpeedVac vacuum centrifuge. Each sample was then desalted and concentrated on a C18 stage tip (68). Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry Peptides from all samples were eluted from C18 stage tips using 40% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid before online nanoflow LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide mix- tures were analyzed using an EASY-nLC system (Proxeon) connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelec- trospray ion source. Peptides were separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75-mm inner diameter) in-house packed with 3-mm reversed-phase C18 beads (ReproSil-Pur AQ, Dr. Maisch) with a 180-min gradient from 6 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Standard mass spectrometric parameters were as follows: spray voltage, 2 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 275°C; S-lens radio frequency level of 50%. The Q Exactive was operated in data- dependent acquisition mode using the“sensitive scanning method,” essen- tially as described (69) with a few modifications. Full-scan MS spectra [mass/charge ratio (m/z), 300 to 1750; resolution, 70,000 at m/z 200] were detected in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation of ions at 1e6 target value based on predictive AGC from the previous scan. For every full scan, the 10 most intense ions were isolated and fragmented (collision energy: 25%) by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a fixed injection/fill time of 120 ms and 35,000 resolution. Finally, the dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. Mass spectrometry data analysis Raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.2.6.13 or 1.4.0.6 using the Andromeda search engine (70, 71) by which the precursor MS signal intensities were determined and SILAC triplets were automati- cally quantified. Proteins were identified by searching the HCD-MS/MS peak lists against a target/decoy version of the complete human UniProt database supplemented with commonly observed contaminants such as por- cine trypsin and bovine serum proteins. Tandem mass spectra were matched with an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm on precursor masses and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification. Protein N-acetylation, N-pyroglutamine, oxidized methio- nine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were searched as variable modifications for the phosphoproteomics experiment. Protein N-acetylation, oxidized methionine, and deamidation of asparagine and glu- tamine were searched as variable modifications for the interactome and pro- teome experiments. Site localization probabilities were determined by MaxQuant using the PTM (post-translational modification) scoring algorithm (70, 72). The data sets were filtered by posterior error probability to achieve an FDR below 1% for peptides, proteins, and modification sites. Only peptides with Andromeda score >40 (unmodified and modified) were included in the total peptide list. Minimal peptide length was seven amino acids. Bioinformatic analysis For the phosphoproteomics data, only peptides with a phosphorylation site localization probability of at least 0.75 (class I, shown in table S2) (72) were included in the bioinformatic analyses. To identify phosphorylation sites with significantly regulated ratios, we compared the ratio distributions of all quantified phosphopeptides with all nonphosphorylated peptides that we expect not to change and therefore specify our technical variance. To determine the level of regulation, each analyzed time point was considered an independent experiment and cutoffs for up- and down-regulation were set to allow for an estimated 5% false-positive rate based on the distribution of ratios of identified and quantified nonphosphorylated peptides. Thus, cutoffs were individually determined for each time point, and the condition for 120-min NGF + CHX was solely used to adjust the cutoffs for the 120-min time point assuming that phosphorylation sites regulated upon NGF stimula- tion downstream of the receptor initially present at the cell surface displayed a similar behavior under the two conditions (±CHX) (table S2). For interactome data, ratios of identified and quantified dynamic interactors were normalized to the ratio of TrkA to account for uneven efficiency during individual pull- downs performed in parallel. Significantly changing dynamic interactors and proteome changes were identified for proteins with a ratio at all analyzed time points, and regulation was determined by significance B testing (P < 0.05) using Perseus version 1.3.9.10 (tables S1 and S3) (70). Temporal profiling was performed for phosphorylation site changes and proteome expression changes by fuzzy c-means clustering using GProX 1.1.12 by requesting seven or four clusters, respectively, with a fuzzification parameter of 2 and 100 algorithm iterations (73). Clustering was performed on phosphorylation sites and proteins with a ratio at all time points and sig- nificantly regulated to at least one time point. GO enrichment analysis was performed using InnateDB (74), and sig- nificantly overrepresented GO terms for biological process were determined using Fisher’s exact test and P values were corrected using the Benjamini- Hochberg FDR test to account for multiple testing. The analysis of cluster- assigned phosphoproteins was performed on each individual cluster, and significantly enriched GO terms within at least one signaling cluster were visualized by hierarchical clustering. Significantly overrepresented GO terms within the interactome and proteome data were represented in bar plots. The overview of phosphoproteins represented in fig. S5A was done manually based on their function as protein kinase, adaptor, GTPase regu- lator, or other. In addition, to visualize the dynamics of the sites, heatmaps of the log2 ratios were created using the software R including only sites as- signed to sustained signaling (clusters 1 to 3). Proteins included were grouped into“MAPK signaling,” which included the following associated significantly regulated GO terms:“MAPK cascade,” “nerve growth factor receptor signaling,” “activation of MAPKK activity” and“activation of MAPK activity,” and“Differentiation,” which included“axonogenesis,” “positive regulation of neuron differentiation,” “axon guidance,” and“neu- ron projection development.” To asses for sequence bias around the regulated phosphorylation sites, sequence motif logo plots (±6 amino acids adjacent to the identified phos- phorylated sites) were generated and visualized using the IceLogo software (75) with default parameters (P < 0.01). The analysis was performed inde- pendently on each group of cluster-assigned phosphorylation sites and com- pared with nonregulated site sequences, which was used as a common background. The nonregulated phosphorylation sites were defined as sites with ratios within less than 1 SD away from the mean of the distribution of identified nonphosphorylated peptides. Kinase-substrate relationships were predicted using the NetworKIN algorithm (41), which combines the catalog of kinase consensus motifs from the NetPhorest atlas (41) with information for protein-protein associa- tions from the STRING database (23203871). To calculate the differential kinase activity, predictions for all phosphorylation sites assigned to one of the sustained signaling clusters 1 to 3 were compared to the nonregulated sites. The analysis was restrained to those kinases that were experimentally identified within the neuroblastoma cell line used based on the MS analyses, resulting in the inclusion of 228 different kinases. We calculated the differ- ential activity in each of the three different sets on the basis of a one-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for increased activity. For each kinase, we com- pared the score distribution of its assigned sites to the distribution of the sites assigned to the kinase from the background set. The reported P values are adjusted for the FDR (76). The protein network based on TrkA, interactome data were obtained by using the STRING database (version 9.1) (77). To ensure high confidence, only interactions assigned as experimentally verified were used and a con- fidence score over 0.7 was required. Further network analysis and visualiza- tion were performed by using the Cytoscape platform (version 3.1) (78). Enrichment analysis of transcription factor binding sites was performed using the DAVID bioinformatics resource with an FDR cutoff of 0.1% (79). Estimation of site occupancy We estimated the site occupancy in terms of modifications (phosphorylation or ubiquitylation) based on regulated phosphopeptide and diGly-containing peptide SILAC ratios, respectively, as previously described (80). The calcu- lation is based on a set of equations that makes use of the information en- coded in the SILAC ratio of the modified peptide (x), its corresponding nonmodified version (y), and the overall ratio of the protein based on the median SILAC ratio of all other unmodified peptides (z). The analysis is performed pairwise between the untreated control sample (“light” SILAC cells, termed“a”) and the NGF-stimulated sample (“medium” or “heavy” SILAC cells, termed“b”). The proportion between a modified peptide and its corresponding unmodified peptide counterpart in untreated control sam- ple is calculated as a = (z− y)/(x− z), and in NGF-stimulated samples as b= [x*(z− y))/(y*(x− z)]. On the basis of this, the fractional modification (phos- phorylation or ubiquitylation) site stoichiometry in control and NGF-stimulated samples can be calculated as a/(1 + a) and b/(1 + b) for each time point, respectively. This method applies equally well in case of missed cleavages induced by phosphorylation or ubiquitylation and assumes that (i) all three SILAC ratios are measured accurately (like in the Orbitrap mass analyzer); (ii) there are two states for the same peptide (modified and nonmodified); and (iii) the SILAC ratio changes between states. Statistical analysis Statistical tests were applied for experiments performed in three biological replicates. Results shown are the mean of three measurements ± SD. For neurite outgrowth experiments, P values were calculated by a two-sample Student’s t test [Figs. 1B, 4D, 5 (B, E, and H), and 6C and fig. S7D]. The test was applied on measured percentages of neurite-bearing cells, and normality of data was assumed because underlying counts of cells either positive or neg- ative for bearing neurites were n > 10. A one-sample Student’s t test was used for calculating P values for the quantification experiments [Figs. 3 (A, B, and E), 5G, and 6 (E and H) and fig. S7E]. Here, ratios of control versus treatment were log2-transformed, and the mean of three experiments was tested to be different from 0. In Fig. 3C, P values were calculated using a two-sample Student’s t test on slopes calculated by the linear least squares regression model. Bonferroni correction was used to correct for multiple t test compar- isons. Significance was concluded when P < 0.05 or P < 0.01 as indicated by * or **, respectively, in the figures.

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

