=== TITLE ===
Plasma Proteome Profiling to Assess Human Health and Disease

=== ABSTRACT ===
Proteins in the circulatory system mirror an individual’s physiology. In daily clinical practice, protein levels are generally determined using single-protein immunoassays. High-throughput, quantitative analysis using mass-spectrometry-based proteomics of blood, plasma, and serum would be advantageous but is challenging because of the high dynamic range of protein abundances. Here, we introduce a rapid and robust “plasma proteome profiling” pipeline. This single-run shotgun proteomic workflow does not require protein depletion and enables quantitative analysis of hundreds of plasma proteomes from 1 μl single finger pricks with 20 min gradients. The apolipoprotein family, inflammatory markers such as C-reactive protein, gender-related proteins, and >40 FDA-approved biomarkers are reproducibly quantified (CV <20% with label-free quantification). Furthermore, we functionally interpret a 1,000-protein, quantitative plasma proteome obtained by simple peptide pre-fractionation. Plasma proteome profiling delivers an informative portrait of a person’s health state, and we envision its large-scale use in biomedicine.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Tryptophan Fluorescence Emission Assay for Protein Quantification
Protein concentrations were determined after solubilizing of samples in 8 M urea by tryptophan fluorescence emission at 350 nm using an excitation wavelength of 295 nm. Tryptophan at a concentration of 0.1 μg/μl in 8 M urea was used to establish a standard calibration curve (0–4 μl). From this, we estimated that 0.1 μg/μl tryptophan is equivalent to the emission of 7 μg/μl of human protein extract, assuming that tryptophan on average accounts for 1.3% of the human protein amino acid composition.
Blood Collection from Finger Pricks and Venous Blood Sampling
Blood was taken by lancets (Vitrex Sterilance Lite II) to obtain small quantities of capillary blood, and 5 μl of blood was transferred by a pipette into a pipette-tip-based centrifugal devices containing 0.56 μl 106 mM trisodium citrate (end concentration 10.6 mM trisodium citrate, as commonly used in blood collection tubes). The pipette-tip-based centrifugal device was made by melting the end of a pipette tip to seal it. When larger amounts of plasma were needed, blood was taken by venipuncture using a commercially available winged infusion set into collection tubes containing sodium citrate. The blood was centrifuged for 15 min at 2,000 × g, and plasma was harvested. Blood was sampled from healthy donors, who provided written informed consent, with prior approval of the ethics committee of the Max Planck Society.
Plasma taken by venipuncture was used to determine analytical and intra-assay variability, because in this case, larger amounts of plasma (15 μl) were needed.
Plasma for intra-individual variability was taken from one person by four finger pricks (at 6 a.m., 9 a.m., 12 p.m., and 3 p.m.) per day for 8 days. To determine the inter-individual variability, blood was taken by finger pricking of ten different individuals in triplicate (five women and five men), and samples were randomized within the gender groups. Furthermore, blood was taken from all ten fingers of one individual to one individual plasma and by venipuncture from two individuals for the comparison of plasma and serum.
Highly reliable plasma samples (PlasmaRef Panels) were obtained from the blood bank Blutspendedienst des Bayerischen Roten Kreuzes.
High-Abundance Protein Depletion for Building a Matching Library
A combination of two immunodepletion kits was used for optimal removal of the 20 highest abundance plasma proteins with the purpose of establishing a peptide library for matching between runs (Nagaraj et al., 2012). First we used the Agilent Multiple Affinity Removal Spin Cartridge for removal of the top six high-abundance proteins (albumin, IgG, IgA, antitrypsin, transferrin, and haptoglobin), followed by ProteoPrep20 Plasma Immunodepletion Kit for the 20 highest abundance proteins from human plasma (Albumin, IgG, IgA, IgM, IgD, transferrin, fibrinogen, α2-macroglobulin, α1-antitrypsin, haptoglobin, α1-acid glycoprotein, ceruloplasmin, apolipoprotein A-I, apolipoprotein A-II, apolipoprotein B, complement C1q, complement C3, complement C4, plasminogen, and prealbumin). Both depletion steps were carried out according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The depleted plasma was digested and measured as described below. Raw data of the depleted plasma of one individual and undepleted plasma of ten different individuals served as a “library” for matching between runs for the 20 min gradients.
Sample Preparation: Protein Digestion and iST Purification
Sample preparation was performed as described previously (Kulak et al., 2014) with optimization for blood plasma as follows: 24 μl of SDC reduction and alkylation buffer (Kulak et al., 2014) were added to 1 μl of blood plasma. The mixture was boiled for 10 min to denature proteins. After cooling down to room temperature, the proteolytic enzymes LysC and trypsin were added in a 1:100 ratio (micrograms of enzyme to micrograms of protein). Digestion was performed at 37°C for 1 hr. Peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% trifluoro-acetic acid (TFA) for SDB-RPS binding, and 20 μg was loaded on two 14-gauge StageTip plugs. Ethylacetate/1% TFA (125 μl) was added, and the StageTips were centrifuged using an in-house-made StageTip centrifuge (a centrifuge with identical specifications is available from Sonation) for up to 2,000 × g. After washing the StageTips using two wash steps of 100 μl ethylacetate/1% TFA and one of 100 μl ddH2O/0.2% TFA consecutively, purified peptides were eluted by 60 μl of elution buffer (80% acetonitrile, 19% ddH2O, 1% ammonia) into auto sampler vials. The collected material was completely dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge at 45°C (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus). Peptides were suspended in buffer A∗ (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) and afterward sonicated (Branson Ultrasonics, Ultrasonic Cleaner Model 2510).
For the deep plasma data set, 20 μg purified and digested plasma peptides were fractionated using basic reversed-phase pre-fractionation. The peptides were loaded onto a reversed-phase C18 column (1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads; Dr. Maisch) and were eluted using an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A gradient was generated by using a dual-buffer system with buffer A (ddH2O) and buffer B (ddH2O, 80% ACN) adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide. Peptides were separated and eluted from 5% B to 40% B in 50 min followed by a linear increase to 60% B in 10 min. The gradient was followed by a 12 min washout with 60%–95% B. We concatenated the 46 collected fractions into 8 fractions (concatenation scheme: 1 + 9 + 17 + 25, 2 + 10 + 18 + 26, etc.). A total of 1 μg of each concatenated fraction was loaded and measured by LC-MS/MS as described below.
Plasma samples from two individuals were dispensed into a 96-well plate (48 samples for each individual), and the complete sample preparation, with the exception of the centrifugation steps, was performed on an Agilent Bravo liquid handling platform.
Design, recombinant expression, purification and quantification of plasma PrESTs was as described in (Zeiler et al., 2012). Plasma PrESTs of the proteins APOA1, APOA4, APOB, APOE, and SHBG were combined in a master mix, which was added together with the SDC reduction and alkylation buffer to the blood plasma. The subsequent steps for sample preparation workflow are described above.
Ultra-High-Pressure LC and MS
Samples were measured using LC-MS instrumentation consisting of an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high-pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled via a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (Scheltema et al., 2014). Purified peptides were separated on 40 cm HPLC-columns (internal diameter 75 μm; in-house packed into the tip with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch). For each LC-MS/MS analysis, about 1 μg peptides were used for 20 min runs and for each fraction of the deep plasma data set.
Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% v/v formic acid) and eluted with a linear 15 min gradient of 10%–50% of buffer B (0.1% v/v formic acid, 60% v/v acetonitrile), followed by a 5 min 98% wash at a flow rate of 450 nl/min. Column temperature was kept at 60°C by a Peltier element-containing, in-house-developed oven, and parameters were monitored in real time by the SprayQC software (Scheltema and Mann, 2012). MS data were acquired with a Top5 data-dependent MS/MS scan method (topN method). Target values for the full scan MS spectra were 3 × 106 charges in the 300–1,650 m/z range, with a maximum injection time of 25 ms and a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400. A 1.5 m/z isolation window and a fixed first mass of 100 m/z was used for MS/MS scans. Fragmentation of precursor ions was performed by higher energy C-trap dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV. MS/MS ssans were performed at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200 with an ion target value of 5 × 104 and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s to avoid repeated sequencing of identical peptides.
Data Analysis
MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.10 (Cox and Mann, 2008), and peptide lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (version June 2014) and a common contaminants database by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for both proteins and peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids and was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine as expected using trypsin as protease, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Matching between runs was performed with depleted plasma and undepleted plasma of ten different individuals serving as a library. Proteins matching to the reversed database were filtered out. LFQ was performed with a minimum ratio count of 1 (Cox et al., 2014).
Bioinformatics Analysis
All bioinformatics analyses were performed with the Perseus software of the MaxQuant computational platform (Cox and Mann, 2008). Absolute quantification of protein abundances was computed using peptide label-free quantification values, sequence length, and molecular weight (Cox et al., 2014). For enrichment analysis, a false discovery rate of <0.02 after Benjamini-Hochberg correction was used.
Statistical Analysis
Reproducibility was analyzed by calculating R2 values for direct comparison of the LFQ intensities of any two LC-MS/MS runs. CV values were calculated on the basis of LFQ intensities. To determine the analytical and intra-assay variability, we used 15 raw data files, for intra-individual variation 32 files, and for inter-individual variation 30 files, and triplicates for each individual were combined before determining the CV.

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

