=== TITLE ===
Context-specific flow through the MEK/ERK module produces cell- and ligand-specific patterns of ERK single and double phosphorylation.

=== ABSTRACT ===
The same pathway, such as the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, can produce different cellular responses, depending on stimulus or cell type. We examined the phosphorylation dynamics of the MAPK kinase MEK and its targets extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) in primary hepatocytes and the transformed keratinocyte cell line HaCaT A5 exposed to either hepatocyte growth factor or interleukin-6. By combining quantitative mass spectrometry with dynamic modeling, we elucidated network structures for the reversible threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation of ERK in both cell types. In addition to differences in the phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions, the HaCaT network model required two feedback mechanisms, which, as the experimental data suggested, involved the induction of the dual-specificity phosphatase DUSP6 and the scaffold paxillin. We assayed and modeled the accumulation of the double-phosphorylated and active form of ERK1/2, as well as the dynamics of the changes in the monophosphorylated forms of ERK1/2. Modeling the differences in the dynamics of the changes in the distributions of the phosphorylated forms of ERK1/2 suggested that different amounts of MEK activity triggered context-specific responses, with primary hepatocytes favoring the formation of double-phosphorylated ERK1/2 and HaCaT A5 cells that produce both the threonine-phosphorylated and the double-phosphorylated form. These differences in phosphorylation distributions explained the threshold, sensitivity, and saturation of the ERK response. We extended the findings of differential ERK phosphorylation profiles to five additional cultured cell systems and matched liver tumor and normal tissue, which revealed context-specific patterns of the various forms of phosphorylated ERK.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Cell culture, stimulation, and time course experiments The spontaneously immortalized nontumorigenic human keratinocyte– derived cell line HaCaT SD and the Ha-Ras–transformed tumorigenic cell lines HaCaT A5 and HaCaT RT3 (70, 71) were provided by P. Boukamp (Deutsche Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany). HaCaT SD, HaCaT A5, and HaCaT RT3 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’ s modified Eagle’ s medium (DMEM) containing high glucose (4.5 g/liter) (Lonza) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS; Gibco) and 1% penicillin/ streptomycin (Invitrogen). The medium for HaCaT A5 and HaCaT RT3 cells included G418 (200 mg/ml; Sigma). Primary human epidermal ker- atinocytes isolated from a healthy donor were provided by P. Boukamp (Deutsche Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany). The cells were cultivated in DermaLife K Serum Free Human Keratinocyte Medium (CellSystems), consisting of DermaLife Basal Medium and LifeFactors [6 mM L-glutamine, 0.4% Extract P, 1.0 mM epinephrine, rhTGF-a (0.5 ng/ml), hydrocortisone hemisuccinate (100 ng/ml), rhInsulin (5 mg/ml), apo- transferrin (5 mg/ml), 0.02 to 0.15 mM calcium chloride] that were applied according to the manufacturer’ s instructions. Cell lines were authenticated using Multiplex Cell Authentication by Multiplexion as described (72). The SNP (single-nucleotide polymorphism) profiles matched known profiles or were unique. The purity of the HaCaT cell line was validated using the Multiplex cell Contamination Test by Multiplexion as described (73). No Mycoplasma, squirrel monkey retrovirus, or interspecies contam- ination was detected. PMHs were isolated from 8- to 12-week-old C57BL/6N mice (Charles River) housed at the DKFZ animal facility under a constant light/dark cycle, maintained on a standard mouse diet, and allowed ad libitum access to food and water. All animal experiments were approved by the govern- mental review committee on animal care of the state Baden-Württemberg, Germany (reference number A24/10). The isolation procedure was per- formed as previously described (28, 52). After isolation, hepatocytes were seeded at confluence (2 × 106 cells per 6-cm dish or 5 × 106 cells per 10-cm dish) in full medium [phenol red–free Williams E medium (Biochrom) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (Life Technologies), 0.1 mM dexamethasone, insulin (10 mg/ml), 2 mM L-glutamine (Sigma- Aldrich), and 1% (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin 100× (Life Technologies)] onto collagen I–coated cell dishes (BD Biosciences). HaCaT cells and PMHs were cultured at 37°C, 5% CO2 and 95% rel- ative humidity. For activation analysis of MEK1/2 and ERK1/2, PMHs, after cell adhesion, were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.2 to 7.8) (PAN Biotech) and cultivated in serum-free cultivation me- dium [phenol red–free Williams E medium supplemented with 0.1 mM dexamethasone, 2 mM L-glutamine, and 1% (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin 100×] for 16 hours. PMHs were subsequently washed with PBS (PAN Biotech) and cultivated in serum-free cultivation medium depleted of dexamethasone for 6 hours. Fully confluent HaCaT cells were cultivated for 24 hours in FCS-free DMEM before treatment. Because primary hu- man keratinocytes require serum-free medium including specific factors, the medium was not changed after 24 hours, and the experiment was per- formed using serum-free cultivation medium. Primary human hepatocytes were isolated from two male patients who were diagnosed with liver metastasis derived from colorectal cancer. In- formed consent of the patients was obtained according to the ethical guidelines of Charité—Universitätsmedizin Berlin. Primary human hepa- tocytes were isolated by a two-step collagenase perfusion technique ac- cording to Pfeiffer et al. (74). Primary human hepatocytes contained in the gained cell suspension were shipped in ChillProtec Plus (Biochrom) on ice overnight to DKFZ Heidelberg. Primary human hepatocytes were cultivated in full medium as described for primary mouse hepatocytes (28), with an adhesion time of 6 hours. The human HCC cell line HepG2 (ATCC HB-806) was cultivated in phenol red–free DMEM containing high glucose (4.5 g/liter) (Gibco) supple- mented with 10% FCS (Gibco), 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco), 1% L-glutamine (Gibco), and 1% sodium pyruvate (Gibco). Cells were culti- vated in serum-free medium for 16 hours before stimulation. For time course experiments, PMHs were stimulated with recombinant mouse HGF (100 ng/ml) and HaCaT cells were stimulated with recombinant human HGF (rhHGF; 100 ng/ml) (both R&D Systems) or recombinant human IL-6 (R&D Systems) for the indicated times. To explore the influ- ence of MEK1/2 inhibition, PMHs and HaCaT cells were stimulated with HGF (100 ng/ml) for 10 min and subsequently treated with 20 mM MEK1/2 inhibitor (U0126, Cell Signaling Technology) for the indicated times. Untreated or DMSO-treated cells served as a time-matched control. Cell lysis, immunoprecipitation, quantitative immunoblotting, and SDS-PAGE At the indicated time points after stimulation, cells were lysed using total cell lysis buffer [20 mM tris (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA (pH 8.0; AppliChem), 1% (v/v) NP40 (Roche Applied Sciences), 0.1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM Na3VO4, 5 mM NaF, 4-(2- aminoethyl)benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride (AEBSF; 0.1 mg/ml), aprotinin (1 mg/ml)]. For ERK1/2 immunoprecipitation, total cell lysates were mixed with 10% SDS, incubated for 5 min at 95°C for denaturation, and subsequently diluted with 1× total cell lysis buffer. Protein A–Sepharose (GE Healthcare) and ERK1 antibody [ERK1 (K-23), Santa Cruz Biotech- nology], which recognizes both ERK1 and ERK2, were added to the cell lysates; immunoprecipitations were performed overnight at 4°C, and immunoprecipitates were loaded on a 10% SDS–polyacrylamide gel elec- trophoresis (SDS-PAGE) gel. Recombinant human ERK1/2 (rhERK1/2) was loaded to indicate the corresponding endogenous ERK1/2 bands (Cell Signaling Technology; 0.5 mg of rhERK1 and 2 mg of rhERK2). Gels were stained with SimplyBlue SafeStain (Invitrogen) according to the manufac- turer’ s instructions. Bands corresponding to ERK1/2 were excised and sub- jected to mass spectrometry. For the analysis of MEK1/2 and ERK1/2 activation and knockdown of scaffold proteins, total cell lysates were used. Total protein concentration was measured using bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce), and lysates were loaded on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel, in case of MEK in a randomized order to reduce correlated errors (34, 75), separated by electrophoresis and transferred onto a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Millipore). The primary anti- bodies used were specific for phospho-MEK1/2 (Ser217 or Ser221) and total MEK1/2 (#9121 and #9122, respectively; Cell Signaling Technology), diphospho- ERK1/2 (M9692, Sigma), and total ERK1/2 (#9102, Cell Signaling Tech- nology), b-actin (A5441, Sigma-Aldrich), paxillin (sc-365379, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), b-arrestin 2 (#3857, New England Biolabs), IL-17 receptor D (IL-17RD; ab96294, Abcam), IQGAP1 (AM20036AF-N, Acris), MP1 (sc- 9136, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and WDR83 (PAB7991, Acris). Second- ary horseradish peroxidase (HRP)–coupled antibodies (anti-rabbit HRP, anti-goat HRP, protein A HRP) were purchased from Amersham Biosciences and Dianova and used for chemiluminescence detection using enhanced chemi- luminescence substrate (GE Healthcare). Charge-coupled device camera– based signal detection was performed using an ImageQuant LAS 4000 system (GE Healthcare) and quantified using ImageQuant (GE Healthcare). Mass spectrometry analysis with isotope-labeled peptide standards For accurate and site-specific quantification of pT and pYof ERK1/2, mass spectrometry in combination with a targeted and label-based approach was applied. Isotopically labeled peptide/phosphopeptide one-source ratio stan- dards were produced and applied as described in detail previously (35, 58, 76). These peptide standards were analogous to the activation motif–containing tryptic ERK1 and ERK2 peptides and were mixed with the tryptic in-gel digests after 37°C overnight incubation. Gel cutting, reduction, and alkyla- tion, as well as digestion and peptide extraction, were performed as described previously (58). After peptide extraction from gel pieces, samples were purified for peptides by applying the STAGE-Tip method (77). Analyte peptide/standard mixtures derived from time course experiments performed in PMHs and HaCaT A5 cells used for model calibration were measured by nanoUPLC (nanoAcquity, Waters) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). All other samples were measured by EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For both LC- systems, a precolumn setup and acetonitrile-based gradients (0 to 40% in <1 hour) were applied. To ensure a high number of survey scans (survey resolution = 60.000/70.000), the data-dependent acquisition methods were set to Top3 for Orbitrap-XL and to Top10 for Q Exactive. The degrees of ERK1 and ERK2 phosphorylation were analyzed by manual peak integra- tion of endogenous and stable isotope–labeled standard peptides using Thermo Xcalibur Qual Browser version 3.0.63. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) through the PRIDE partner repository (78) with the data set identifier PXD002460. All measured abun- dances of the phosphorylated forms are shown as fractions of the sum of total ERK1 and total ERK2; for example, the abundance of pTpY-ERK1 was calculated as pTpYERK1 % ð Þ ¼ pTpYERK1 pTpYERK1 þ pTERK1 þ pYERK1 þ npERK1 þ pTpYERK2 þ pTERK2 þ pYERK2 þ npERK2 By displaying all isoform- and phosphorylation-specific ERK species as fractions of the sum of total ERK1 and total ERK2, we maintain the relative ratio of all species. In our mathematical models, we treat ERK1, ERK2, and the phosphorylated forms thereof as individual variables. Estimation of stoichiometric ratio of ERK and scaling of ppMEK data For the estimation of the stoichiometric ratio of ERK1/2 in PMHs and HaCaT A5 cells, pTpY-ERK1/2 was measured in quadruplicates 10 min after stimulation with rhHGF (100 ng/ml). Antibodies (M9692, Sigma- Aldrich) with the same affinity to both double-phosphorylated ERK1 and ERK2 isoforms targeting the same sequence (HTGFLpTEpYVAT), as specified by the manufacturer, were used for immunoblotting (fig. S2A). This enabled the calculation of the ratio between pTpY-ERK1 and pTpY- ERK2 from the immunoblotting data. In addition, we performed immuno- precipitations of the same samples with antibodies directed against total ERK1/2 and analyzed the isoform-specific ERK ratios with respect to each phosphorylation site by mass spectrometry. On the basis of both ra- tios, we calculated the stoichiometric ratio between ERK1 and ERK2, and the sum of total ERK1 and total ERK2 was set to 100%. The estimated ratio (mean ± SD, n = 4) was used for the scaling of the mass spectrometry data. For activation analyses of MEK1/2, the maximal abundance of ppMEK was set to 5% on the basis of a previously published study (14) and other data points were scaled accordingly. RNA isolation, RT-PCR, and qRT-PCR For activation analyses of DUSPs, PMHs and HaCaT A5 cells were cul- tivated, incubated in serum-free medium, and stimulated as described above. At the indicated time points, RNA extraction was performed using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’ s in- structions. To obtain complementary DNA (cDNA) from RNA, the high- capacity cDNA reverse transcription kit (Applied Biosystems) was used according to the manufacturer’ s instructions. qRT-PCR analysis was per- formed using LightCycler480 (Roche Applied Science). Samples were prepared with reagents of the LightCycler480 Probes Master Kit from Roche Applied Science. Specific primers were obtained from Eurofins MWG, and fluorescent hybridization probes [Universal Probe Library (UPL)] were obtained from Roche. For normalization of data, the geometric mean of the housekeeper genes HPRT , Ube2r2, and TBP was used. All primers and corresponding UPL probe numbers are listed in table S10, A and B; gene names are provided in table S10C. Transfection with siRNA HaCaT A5 cells were transfected with small interfering RNA (siRNA) oligo- nucleotides targeting human paxillin (SMARTpool: ON-TARGETplus PXN siRNA, L-005163-00-0005, Thermo Scientific), human b-arrestin 2 (SMARTpool: ON-TARGETplus ARRB2 siRNA, L-007292-00-0005, Thermo Scientific), human IL-17RD (SMARTpool: ON-TARGETplus IL-17RD siRNA, L-007946-02-0005, Thermo Scientific), human IQ mo- tif containing guanosine triphosphatase–activating protein 1 (SMARTpool: ON-TARGETplus IQGAP1 siRNA, L-004694-00-0005, Thermo Scientific), human WD repeat domain 83 (SMARTpool: ON-TARGETplus WDR83 siRNA, L-014860-00-0005, Thermo Scientific), human late endosomal/ lysosomal adaptor, MAPK, and MTOR activator 3 (SMARTpool: ON- TARGETplus LAMTOR3 siRNA, L-003572-00-0005, Thermo Scientif- ic), and nontargeting siRNA (scrambled, SMARTpool: ON-TARGETplus Non-targeting Pool, D-001810-10-20, Thermo Scientific) serving as a con- trol, using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’ s instructions. Preparation of human liver tumor tissue Tissue samples from liver tumor patients and corresponding nontumor liv- er tissue, as well as donor medical history and demographics (Table 1) and tissue histology, were provided by Charité—University Medicine Berlin. In- formed consent of the patients for the use of tissue for research purposes was obtained corresponding to the ethical guidelines of Charité—University Medicine Berlin. Each liver tissue piece was cut, placed in tubes, and sub- sequently shaken twice for 30 s in a Precellys 24 homogenizer (Peqlab). Homogenized liver tissue was lysed in total cell lysis buffer [1% NP40, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 10 mM NaF, 1 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 2 mM ZnCl2 (pH 4.0), 1 mM MgCl2, 2 mM Na3VO4, 20% glycerol, aprotinin (2 mg/ml), and AEBSF (200 mg/ml)] for immunoprecipitation. Lysates were rotated for 30 min at 4°C, sonicated, and centrifuged for 10 min at 14,000 rpm at 4°C. Four milligrams of the supernatant was incubated with the ERK1 antibody K-23 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and protein A– Sepharose (GE Healthcare) and rotated overnight at 4°C. Immunoprecipi- tated proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. Gels were washed three times with water for 5 min and then stained for 1 hour with SimplyBlue SafeStain (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’ s instructions. Statistical analysis Each experiment was repeated at least three times. Unless otherwise noted, data are presented as means ± SD. Estimation of experimental error We assumed a binomial distribution of our mass spectrometry data between 0 and 100%, depending on the total degree of phosphorylation (TDP) of all ob- served ERK species. For PMHs and HaCaT A5 cells, TDP was calculated as TDPi ¼ pTpYi þ pTi þ pYi 2 and the corresponding measurement error (ME) was calculated as MEERKi;j ¼ εERKi;j ERKi;j ð100 ERKi;j Þ with i = 1, 2 for ERK1 and ERK2 and j = 1, 2, 3, 4 for np-, pY-, pT-, and pTpY-ERK. The error parameters e were estimated by applying the framework as described previously (49). We developed four ODE systems (table S9, A to G) that were solved by using the CVODES solver (79), and the model parameters were determined by maximum likelihood estimation. The final measurement error further considered the error of the determina- tion of the stoichiometric ratio by propagation of uncertainty. Mathematical modeling and parameter estimation Development of the ODE models and model simulations were performed using the MATLAB toolbox PottersWheel version 3.0.11 (80). Because the abundances of MEK and ERK1/2 are similar (14, 38), all reactions were implemented as linear mass-action kinetics. Kinetic parameters were selected to be isoform-independent for ERK1 and ERK2. Therefore, the observed nonlinearities in information processing depended only on the model structure. Details of the developed models are provided in text S1, tables S1 to S3, S5, and S7 to S9, and data files S1 to S4. Parameters were estimated in logarithmic parameter space, based on a deterministic trust- region algorithm (81). For each parameter estimation round, up to 200 itera- tions were performed with a c2 tolerance of 10−6 and a fit parameter tolerance of 10−6. For the indicated number of parameter estimation rounds, starting values of free kinetic rate constants were generated with a quasi- random number generator between 10−8 and 105. Initial values for model variables were given by the analytical steady state given by the model. In- tegration was carried out with the Fortran RADAU5 integrator based on an implicit Runge-Kutta method (82) of order 5 with an absolute error tolerance of 10−6 and a relative error tolerance of 10−3. Upon parameter estimation, c2 values were calculated as c2 P ð Þ ¼ ∑ N i¼1 yi yðti; PÞ i s2 with yi being data point i with SD si and y(ti; P) being the model value at time point i for parameter values P . Because mass spectrometry–derived data were calculated as absolute numbers, no scaling or offset parameter was implemented. Delay reactions in the mathematical model The linear chain trick method (83) was applied to model a delay. Delay reactions capture a black box behavior with a certain time lag. The mean time delay was estimated as t ¼ N k , with N being the number of implemen- ted delay steps (N = 5, table S3A) and k being the reaction rate of the delay steps (k22, table S3C) (80). DUSP screen data analysis The transcript abundance of the DUSPs was measured in biological tripli- cates, and the mean and SD were calculated. In PMHs, there were two tran- script variants for DUSP16 (DUSP16TV1, DUSP16TV2) and DUSP22 (DUSP22TV1, DUSP22TV2). In HaCaT A5 cells, there were three transcript variants for DUSP10 (DUSP10TV1, DUSP10TV2, DUSP10TV3). For these, the mean and SD were calculated over all replicates of all transcript variants (n = 6 for DUSP16 and DUSP22; n = 9 for DUSP10). Paxillin data analysis Paxillin was measured in biological triplicates. The signal intensities on a single blot were scaled on the mean of all measured signal intensities of each blot. The scaled signal intensities were averaged, and the SD was calculated (n = 3). The experimental knockdown efficiency was calculated by the ratio between the mean signal intensity of all paxillin siRNA–treated samples and the mean signal intensity of all control siRNA–treated samples, and the error considered the propagation of uncertainty. Steady-state dose-response analysis We analytically solved the ODE system to obtain the steady-state equa- tions. For calculating the dose dependency of ERK on ppMEK, we for- mulated the steady-state equations as a function of ppMEK and the estimated parameter set (table S3C). We fixed the kinetic parameters according to the best models so that the steady-state equations were only dependent on ppMEK, which we varied from 0 to 5. For the anal- ysis of criteria compliance, we either increased (×10) or decreased (×0.1) only the indicated parameter for an order of magnitude from the original value. The sum of ERK1 and ERK2 was calculated for the characterization of the distribution of the phosphorylated forms. The values were quantified at three different ppMEK doses according to the ppMEK model in PMHs and HaCaT A5 cells. The ppMEK concentrations were ppMEK(PMH, baseline)= ppMEK(HaCaT, baseline) = 0.386 at baseline, ppMEK(PMH, IL-6)= 2.051, ppMEK(HaCaT, IL-6) = 1.166 at maximum IL-6 stimulation, and ppMEK(PMH, HGF) = 4.468, ppMEK(HaCaT, HGF) = 3.497 at maximum HGF stimulation. Criteria formulation For the characterization of the distribution of the phosphorylated forms of ERK, we established three formula-based criteria. Our first criterion con- sidered the low ERK activation at its baseline (low basal phosphorylation), and it was fulfilled if 2 pTpYbaseline ≤ pTpYbaseline with the amount of basal pTpY-ERK1/2 in our original model denoted as pTpYbaseline and the amount of basal pTpY-ERK1/2 upon parameter varia- tion (*) as pTpYbaseline. The second condition took into account the theoretical, statistical distribution based on the total phosphorylation degree and showed if the distribution of monophosphorylated ERK1/2 was low, indicating a dual phosphorylation preference (58). This condition, terme d“dual phospho-rylation preference,” was fulfilled if with the statistical distribution (r) pTr i and pYr i TDPi ð100 TDPiÞ pTr i ¼ pYr i ¼ 100 with the total degree of phosphorylation upon parameter variation (TDPi ) TDPi ¼ pTpYi þ pTi þ pYi 2 and with i = 1, 2 for IL-6 and HGF. The third criterion, termed“efficient signal amplification,” considered a sufficient degree of signal transmis- sion through the ERK phosphorylation circuit. It was fulfilled if pTpYIL‐6 ≥ pTpYIL‐6∧pTpYHGF ≥ pTpYHGF

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

