=== TITLE ===
Phosphatase POPX2 Exhibits Dual Regulatory Functions in Cancer Metastasis.

=== ABSTRACT ===
Cancer metastasis is a complex mechanism involving multiple processes. Previously, our integrative proteome, transcriptome, and phosphoproteome study reported that the levels of serine/threonine phosphatase POPX2 were positively correlated with cancer cell motility through modulating MAPK signaling. Surprisingly, here we found that POPX2 knockdown cells induced more numerous and larger tumor nodules in lungs in longer term animal studies. Interestingly, our analysis of DNA microarray data from cancer patient samples that are available in public databases shows that low POPX2 expression is linked to distant metastasis and poor survival rate. These observations suggest that lower levels of POPX2 may favor tumor progression in later stages of metastasis. We hypothesize that POPX2 may do so by modulation of angiogenesis. Secretome analysis of POPX2-knockdown MDA-MB-231 cells using LC-MS/MS-based SILAC quantitative proteomics and cytokine array show that silencing of POPX2 leads to increased secretion of exosomes, which may, in turn, induce multiple pro-angiogenic cytokines. This study, combined with our previous findings, suggests that a single ubiquitously expressed phosphatase POPX2 influences cancer metastasis via modulating multiple biological processes including MAPK signaling and exosome cytokine secretion.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
Animal Lung Metastasis Assay
All animal work was done in accordance with protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Female Balb/c nude mice at 4–6 weeks old were used for xenografting studies. For lung metastasis formation, 1 × 106 viable cells stably expressing control or POPX2 shRNA were washed and harvested in HBSS and subsequently injected into the lateral tail vein in a volume of 0.1 mL. Animals were monitored for metastasis-associated morbidity. Whole lungs were harvested and surface tumor foci were counted. All animal experiments were done according to the National Advisory Committee for Laboratory Animal Research (NACLAR) Guidelines.
Tube Formation Assay
The in vitro tube formation assay was optimized based on reported methods. (23, 24) A six-well plate was coated with 100 μL matrigel per well. Similar numbers of HUVECs (human umbilical vein endothelial cells) were plated on the matrigel-coated wells and incubated in EGM-2 (complete endothelial cell medium) for 40 min for attachment. The HUVECs were then incubated in the respective conditioned media for 4 h to allow tube formation. The tubular structures were captured after 4 h using an Axio Observer microscope (Carl Zeiss, Germany) and analyzed by ImageJ software. Ten different fields per condition were captured and quantified. Measurements were expressed as the total tube length and the number of branch points.
CAM (Chick Chorioallantoic Membrane) Assay
Details of CAM assay have been previously described. (6) In brief, shells of 4 day old fertilized eggs (Chew’s Agriculture, Singapore) were sawn equatorially with a cutoff wheel, and the contents were gently transferred into sterilized 80 mm2 plastic weighing boats and incubated ex vivo in an egg incubator (Brinsea, North Somerset, U.K.) at 37.7 °C and 76% humidity under a homemade plastic shield to prevent the albumen from drying out. For each onplant, two nylon mesh layers were embedded into 2 mg/mL collagen mixed with conditioned media (CM). Collagen onplants were placed randomly on CAMs. Distinct blood vessels appearing in the onplants above the plane of the lower mesh were counted.
SILAC (Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino Acids in Cell Culture) and Cell Culture
Custom RPMI1640 medium lacking arginine and lysine, 13C6-arginine (heavy R6), and 13C615N2-lysine (heavy K8) were purchased from Cambridge Isotopes Laboratories (Andover, MA). 12C6-arginine (light) and 12C6-lysine (light) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Dialyzed fetal bovine serum (FBS) was purchased from Invitrogen. The control and POPX2 knockdown (X2-shRNA1/2) MDA-MB-231 stable cells used in this study were previously described. (11) The control cells were cultured in RPMI1640 medium containing heavy arginine and heavy lysine, along with 10% (v/v) dialyzed FBS and 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The X2-shRNA1 cells were maintained in RPMI1640 medium containing light arginine and light lysine, along with 10% (v/v) dialyzed FBS, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Invitrogen). All cells were grown in 37 °C humidified incubator supplemented with 5% CO2. The cells used in the experiments were grown up to seven passages to ensure full incorporation of heavy and light amino acids. The complete incorporation of heavy K8 and R6 into cellular proteins was confirmed by LC–MS/MS. Table S1 show complete SILAC labeling in control cells with K8 and R6 SILAC reagents in three randomly selected peptides with different abundances.
Conditioned Media (CM) Collection and Concentration
When the cells were grown to 70% confluence, all cells were washed with 1× PBS for four times and serum-free RPMI1640 medium once, followed by exposure to serum-free medium for 6 h to remove serum proteins. Cells were then exposed to fresh serum-free medium for another 24 h for secretome/CM collection. Protease inhibitor was added to the CM collected (400 mL each) to minimize protein degradation. The CM were centrifuged at 201g for 10 min at 4 °C and filtered (0.22 μm pore size) to remove cell debris. The CM were then concentrated to 200–300 μL using a 15 mL ultra filter with 10 kDa cutoff (Millipore) by centrifugation at 3220g at 4 °C. The concentrated CM were collected in a sterile 1.5 mL tube and stored at −80 °C until use.
SDS-PAGE
Conditioned media were dissolved in 10% SDS, along with complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and phosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and dithiothreitol (Sigma). Protein concentration was determined by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay. Equal amounts of protein (50 μg each) from heavy and light samples were mixed at a 1:1 ratio and stored at −80 °C for the following experiments. Proteins (∼50 μg) were separated on 4–12% NuPAGE gradient gel (Invitrogen). After SDS-PAGE, Coomassie blue staining was adopted to visualize protein bands.
In-Gel Digestion
The whole lane was cut into 10 fractions for in-gel digestion. The gel pieces were washed with destaining solution several times until the color totally disappeared, followed by dehydration with 100% acetonitrile and vacuum-dried. Subsequently, proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 1 h, followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min. Gel pieces were dehydrated again with 100% acetonitrile and vacuum-dried. In-gel digestion was carried out by trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) at 1:100 (m/m) and at 37 °C overnight. The supernatant was then transferred to a new 1.5 mL tube, and the peptides were extracted with extraction buffer (50% acetonitrile + 5% acetic acid). Gel pieces were vortexed for 10 s and sonicated for 30 min. The supernatant was collected into the same tube. The extraction steps were repeated several times for complete peptide extraction. Peptides were vacuum-dried and stored at −80 °C until LC–MS/MS analysis.
LC–MS/MS Analysis
Three independent biological replicates (BR1, BR2, and BR3) were performed (Figure 3A). The tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, and each fraction was injected twice for technical replicates (TR1 and TR2) in LC–MS/MS. The peptides were separated and analyzed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher) as previously described. (25) Approximately 2 μg of peptide from each fraction was injected into an Acclaim peptide trap column (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) via the Dionex RSLCnano autosampler. Peptides were separated in a Dionex EASY-Spray 75 μm × 10 cm column packed with PepMap C18 3 μm, 100 Å (Thermo-Scientific, Waltham, MA) at 35 °C. The flow rate was 300 nL min–1. Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in 5% acetonitrile) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) were used to establish a 60 min gradient. Peptides were then analyzed on Q-Exactive with an EASY nanospray source (Thermo Fisher) at an electrospray potential of 1.5 kV. A full MS scan (350–1600 m/z range) was acquired at a resolution of 70 000 at m/z 200 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set as 15 s. The resolution of the HCD spectra was set to 35 000 at m/z 200. The AGC settings of the full MS scan and the MS2 scan were 3E6 and 2E5, respectively. The 10 most intense ions above the 2000 count threshold were selected for fragmentation in HCD with a maximum ion accumulation time of 120 ms. An isolation width of 2 was used for MS2. Single and unassigned charged ions were excluded from MS/MS. For HCD, the normalized collision energy was set to 28%. The underfill ratio was defined as 0.2%.
Raw data files of the six replicates (three biological replicates × two injections) were processed and searched as six experiments using MaxQuant (v1.5.2.8) (26, 27) and the Uniprot human protein database (downloaded on 15 July 2015, 90 478 sequences, 35 890 546 residues) together with the common contaminant proteins. Standard search type with 2 multiplicity, 3 maximum labeled AAs, and heavy labeled Lys8 and Arg6 were used for the SILAC quantitation. The database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine bundled with MaxQuant using the MaxQuant default parameters for Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer. In brief, the first and main searches peptide mass tolerance were 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively, while the MS/MS match tolerance was 20 ppm with FTMS deisotoping enabled. The absence of two trypsin cleavage sites per protein was allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications. The search was performed in the revert decoy mode with PSM FDR, protein FDR, and site decoy fraction set to 0.01.
A total of 1560 proteins with at least two unique peptides were identified in the secretome by Andromeda in MaxQuant with FDR <1% (Table S2). The scatter plots of intertechnical replicates and interbiological replicates were used to evaluate the technical and biological reproducibility of the experiments, respectively (Table S2). All peptide sequences are listed in Table S5.
LC–MS/MS raw data of the six replicates (three biological replicates × two injections) and results for protein and peptide identification and quantification from MaxQuant were submitted to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (28) via the PRIDE data repository with the data set identifier PXD003940.
Cytokine Protein Array and MMP (Matrix Metalloproteinase) Antibody Array
RayBio Human Cytokine Array V (catalog no.: AAH-CYT-5-2) was purchased from RayBiotech, USA. The human MMP antibody array membrane (catalog no.: ab134004) was purchased from Abcam, U.K. To prepare the conditioned media, cells were plated in 100 mm tissue culture dishes and cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS until they reached 70–80% confluence. The cells were washed twice with serum-free DMEM and incubated for 24 h in serum-free DMEM. Assay for cytokine antibody arrays was carried out as per manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, cytokine array membranes were blocked with 5% BSA/TBS (0.01 M Tris-Cl pH 7.6/0.15 M NaCl) for 1 h. Membranes were then incubated with 2 mL of conditioned media prepared from different cell lines. After extensive washing with TBS/0.1%v/v Tween 20 (three times, 5 min each) to remove unbound materials, the membranes were incubated in 1:250-diluted biotin-conjugated primary antibodies at room temperature for 1 to 2 h and washed as described above before incubation in 1:1000-diluted horseradish peroxidase-conjugated streptavidin for 1 h at room temperature. Unbound HRP-streptavidin was washed out with TBS/0.1% Tween 20. Finally, the signals were detected by ECL system. The MMP antibody array analysis was done as described in the manufacturer’s manual, and all of the reagents were provided by the kit. Densitometric values of the spots were quantified using Protein Array Analyzer of ImageJ and listed in Table S4.
RNA Extraction and Real-Time Quantitative PCR (qPCR) Analysis
Total RNA of the cells were extracted using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen), followed by synthesis of cDNA from 2 μg of total RNA using SuperScript VILO cDNA Synthesis Kit (Life Technology). Real-time PCR was performed using SYBR Green Real-Time PCR Master Mixes and StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR Systems (Life Technology) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The relative gene expression levels were calculated using 2–ΔΔCT method. The expression level of the target gene was normalized against GAPDH values. The data presented were expressed as fold changes with respect to their corresponding controls. The primers used were listed in Table S3.
Cell Adhesion Assay
The 96-well dish was precoated with BSA (10 mg/mL), fibronectin (10 μg/mL), or collagen (100 μg/mL). Similar numbers (2 × 104) of MDA-MB-231 cells stably expressing either control shRNA or POPX2 shRNA1/2 were seeded in the coated 96-well dish and incubated for 30 min for attachment. After cell attachment, the 96-well dish was rinsed with 1× PBS to remove nonadhering cells. Cells were then fixed with 5% glutaraldehyde/PBS at room temperature for 20 min before washing three times with distilled water, followed by staining with 0.1% (w/v) crystal violet at room temperature for 1 h. The crystal violet was then solubilized using 10% acetic acid, and the absorbance was read by a spectrophotometer at 570 nm.
Immunoblotting, Antibodies, and Plasmid Constructs
Fifty μg protein from each cell lysate was subjected to reducing SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) using 12% resolving gels for 10–70 kDa proteins of interest or 10% resolving gels for 20–100 kDa proteins of interest. SDS-PAGE was performed at 120 V at room temperature. Resolved proteins were subsequently transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad, USA) at 80 V for 2 h at room temperature. The blot was blocked with 5% (w/v) skimmed milk in 0.05% (v/v) Tween 20/Tris-buffered saline for 1 h at room temperature and probed with respective antibodies, followed by secondary antibodies dissolved in 5% (w/v) skimmed milk. The blots were developed with either Novex ECL Chemiluminescent Substrate Reagent Kit (Invitrogen) or Lumigen (GE Healthcare). All western blot analyses were conducted with at least three independent experiments. The antibodies used in our work were anti-POPX2 (self-raised), anti-CD81 (Santa Cruz), anti-CD9 (Santa Cruz), anti-HSP70 (Santa Cruz), anti-HSP90 (Santa Cruz), anti-COL6A1 (Santa Cruz), anti-LAMA5 (Santa Cruz), anti-actin (Millipore), anti-E-cadherin (BD transduction), anti-vimentin (BD transduction), anti-β-catenin (Sigma), and anti-N-cadherin (BD transduction). The POPX2 siRNA sequence is 5′-ACCGCGCCUACUUUGCUGUGUUUGA-3′, and siPOPX2-resistant construct (X2r) was generated in pXJ40-GFP backbone.
Immunostaining
Similar numbers of cells were grown on coverslips in a six-well dish until 90% confluence before fixing with 5% paraformaldehyde for 20 min at room temperature. The fixed cells were then permeabilized with 0.1% TritonX-100/PBS for 10 min at room temperature, followed by blocking with 4% BSA/PBS for at least 1 h at room temperature. Primary antibodies were 1:100 diluted in 1% TritonX-100/PBS and incubated with the cells at 4 °C overnight. Secondary antibodies were also diluted 1:100 in 1% TritonX-100/PBS and incubated with the cells at room temperature for 1 h, followed by mounting with DAPI. Images were captured using an Axio Observer microscope (Carl Zeiss, Germany) and analyzed by ImageJ software.
Bioinformatics
Pathway Analysis
The differentially expressed proteins were submitted to DAVID (Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery) (29) using their official_gene_symbol. The KEGG pathway annotations were downloaded and plotted. P value for each KEGG pathway was −Log converted and plotted.
Secreted Protein Prediction
Secreted proteins undergoing classical secretory pathway were predicted with SignalP (30) if the protein received a signal peptide probability of ≥0.9. Secreted proteins undergoing nonclassical secretory pathway were predicted with SecretomeP (31) if the protein received an NN score ≥0.6. It is also possible that shed membrane receptors are released to the extracellular space. This class of proteins was predicted with TMHMM. (32) Proteins associated with exosome were obtained from the ExoCarta database. (33) Proteins localized in the extracellular space (GO: 0005615) were also retrieved from Gene Ontology.
Cancer Survival and Metastasis Analysis
Kaplan–Meier plotter (34, 35) was employed to analyze the association between POPX2 (gene symbol: PPM1F) expression and breast cancer survival rate using microarray data downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), European Genome-Phenome Archive (EGA), and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) databases. The association between POPX2 expression and relapse free survival (RFS) comprising 3557 patient samples, overall survival (OS) comprising 1117 patient samples, and distance metastasis free survival (DMFS) comprising 1610 patient samples were performed individually. All of the other parameters were set as defaulted. Patient samples were split into two groups based on various quantile expressions of the PPM1F: patients with low PPM1F expression group (black) and patients with high PPM1F expression group (red). The two patient cohorts were compared by Kaplan–Meier survival plot. The Hazard Ratio (HR) with 95% confidence intervals and logrank P value were calculated. The mRNA expressions of PPM1F at the primary site and metastasis site were compared in breast cancer, head and neck cancer, kidney cancer, lung cancer, and prostate cancer using Oncomine database. (36) For all of these analyses, patient samples were split into two groups: patient samples from the primary site and from the metastasis site with the specific number of patients indicated. The expression levels of PPM1F between these two groups were compared based on the mean of log2 median-centered expression ratio, and p value was calculated.
POPX2 Expression Analysis in Different Breast Cancer Subtypes
The mRNA expressions of PPM1F in a panel of basal or luminal breast cancer cell lines were extracted from Gene expression-based Outcome for Breast cancer Online (GOBO) analysis tool (37) and plotted. The mRNA expressions of PPM1F in the triple-negative (TNBC, also named as basal-like cells) and non-triple-negative (non-TNBC) breast cancer cells were compared in several breast cancer data sets (Tabchy Breast, Miyake Breast, Esseman Breast, Chin Breast, and Kao Breast) retrieved from Oncomine database. (36) For all of these analyses, the cell lines were split into two groups, triple-negative (TNBC) and non-triple-negative (non-TNBC) breast cancer, with the specific number of samples indicated. The expression levels of PPM1F of these two groups were compared based on the mean of log2 median-centered expression ratio and p value was calculated.

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

