=== TITLE ===
Open search unveils modification patterns in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded thermo HCD and SCIEX TripleTOF shotgun proteomes

=== ABSTRACT ===
The application of database search algorithms with very wide precursor mass tolerances for the “Open Search” paradigm has brought new efforts at post-translational modification discovery in shotgun proteomes. This approach has motivated the acceleration of database search tools by incorporating fragment indexing features. In this report, we compare open searches and sequence tag searches of high-resolution tandem mass spectra to seek a common “palette” of modifications when analyzing multiple formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues from Thermo Q-Exactive and SCIEX TripleTOF instruments. While open search in MSFragger produced some gains in identified spectra, careful FDR control limited the best result to 24% more spectra than narrow search (worst result: a loss of 9%). Open pFind produced high apparent sensitivity for PSMs, but entrapment sequences hinted that the actual error rate may be higher than reported by the software. Combining sequence tagging, open search, and chemical knowledge, we converged on this set of PTMs for our four FFPE sets: mono- and di-methylation (nTerm and Lys), single and double oxidation (Met and Pro), and variable carbamidomethylation (nTerm and Cys).


=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
3.1. Data sets
“Nielsen” data were acquired from ProteomeXchange accession PXD000743 [22]. Twenty experiments in WIFF format were generated on a SCIEX TripleTOF 5600+ at Aarhus University in Aarhus, Denmark, during March of 2014. Four LC-MS/MS experiments were conducted from each of five patients (indicated by the numbers 36, 38, 39, 40, and 41), with ‘A’ files representing amyloid tissue and ‘B’ files representing control tissue. “-2” and “-3” suffixes represented two technical replicates from each sample. After conversion to mzML, a total of 218,397 tandem mass spectra were available, of which 41% were specified to result from fragmentation of doubly-charged precursor ions. Over the course of these twenty experiments, tandem mass spectra were acquired at a rate of 3.03 Hz. MS/MS scans averaged a peak density average of 38 peaks per spectrum.
“Buthelezi” data were generated in July of 2018 on a SCIEX TripleTOF 6600 at the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research in Pretoria, South Africa. The twelve experiments compared one-slide-at-a-time pressure-based paraffin removal (A1-4) with all-at-once paraffin removal (A5-8) with freshly frozen samples (A9-12) using human breast tissue under CSIR Research Ethics Committee reference 213/2017. After conversion to mzML, a total of 474,722 tandem mass spectra were available, of which 39% resulted from doubly-charged precursor ions. Over all twelve experiments, tandem mass spectra were acquired at a rate of 8.40 Hz. MS/MS scans averaged a peak density average of 54 peaks per spectrum. These WIFF data have been made available at ProteomeXchange as accession PXD013107. More detailed sample handling information appears in Supporting Information.
“Zimmerman” data were generated in December of 2014 on a Thermo Q-Exactive at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee and stored in the ProteomeXchange repository as accession PXD001651. The five HCD experiments are five technical replicates from a human breast cancer FFPE sample. These files do not capture biological variation because they were collected to support a bioinformatics tutorial on PTM identification at the 2015 MidWinter Proteomics Bioinformatics Seminar in Semmering, Austria. After conversion to mzML, a total of 79,803 tandem mass spectra were available, of which 31% resulted from doubly-charged precursor ions. Over all five experiments, tandem mass spectra were acquired at a rate of 3.55 Hz. MS/MS scans averaged a peak density average of 418 peaks per spectrum.
“Nair” data were generated in May of 2016 on a Thermo Q-Exactive at the University of Cape Town in South Africa. Samples were drawn from 48 cases of malignant medulloblastoma that were added to the FFPE archive between 1988 and 2014 under approval from the University of Cape Town Faculty of Health Sciences Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC 149/2014). Assignment to Group 3 or Group 4 categories was performed via Nanostring analysis and IHC (selection of only Group 3 and 4 cases for this manuscript was an entirely arbitrary choice). Five distinct samples from each of the two Groups were subjected to LC-MS/MS. After conversion to mzML, a total of 245,589 tandem mass spectra were available, of which 36% corresponded to doubly-charged precursor ions. Over all ten experiments, tandem mass spectra were acquired at a rate of 4.55 Hz. MS/MS scans averaged a peak density average of 148 peaks per spectrum. These RAW data have been made available at ProteomeXchange as accession PXD013528. More detailed sample handling information appears in Supporting Information.
3.2. Bioinformatics pipeline
WIFF files were converted to mzML format using the SCIEX MS Data Converter, employing a script to automatically process every WIFF in the directory, applying the index and zlib options and employing the “ProteinPilot” peaklister (see Supporting Information). This differed from the conversion in Nielsen et al. [22] by outputting an mzML rather than an MGF (the software attempts to reduce all fragments to 1+ charge in the latter case). The Nielsen data required an mzML-to-mzML conversion in ProteoWizard msConvert before they could be identified in MSFragger (ProteoWizard and SCIEX MS Data Converter format their mzML outputs somewhat differently).
RAW files were converted to mzML using ProteoWizard msConvert 3.0 [32] using these options: -filter “peakPicking true 1-" -z. A rough characterization of mzML data from all four experiments was carried out by Bumbershoot QuaMeter IDFree [33], producing the metrics available in Supporting Information, such as the count of MS/MS scans and fraction of precursors that were doubly charged. The software was configured to allow precursor masses to vary as much as 50 ppm from scan to scan.
The sequence database employed for all four datasets was constructed from the human reference proteome downloaded from UniProt on October 22, 2018 as well as the SORCE reference proteome (Sorangium cellulosum) from the same date. HUMAN contributed 95,936 protein sequences while SORCE contributed 10,372. Two additional sequences were added to make up the total: TRY1_BOVIN and TRYP_PIG (bovine and porcine trypsin, respectively). While HUMAN sequences greatly outnumber SORCE sequences in the FASTA, any “hit” to a SORCE peptide can be counted as a false positive provided that the peptide is not also found in a human protein. The inclusion of this organism in the database is intended as an entrapment set [34], though the amino acid frequencies and protein lengths of SORCE likely differ substantially from those of HUMAN. Facile interpretations, such as saying that each protein hit in SORCE corresponds to 9.25 false protein hits in HUMAN (the ratio of protein sequence counts between the two species), should be avoided because of these mismatches.
3.3. Search engines
Because of its high discrimination, we selected the MS-GF + search engine (October 15, 2018 build) to represent the performance of database search with “narrow” precursor m/z tolerance [23]. For SCIEX TripleTOF sets, precursor mass tolerances of 10 ppm, 20 ppm, and 50 ppm were tested (-t parameter), and the fragment tolerance was set through the -inst 2 (TOF) parameter. Thermo sets were evaluated with 10 ppm and 20 ppm tolerances, using the -inst 3 (Q-Exactive) parameter for fragment mass accuracy. Up to two dynamic modifications were allowed per PSM (NumMods = 2), but only oxidation was allowed in initial database searches, and all Cys residues were assumed to be 57.021464 higher than the residue mass. All searches employed target-decoy assessment (-tda 1) and semi-tryptic specificity (-ntt 1) was employed for initial characterization. Output files were generated in mzIdentML format [35].
The PTM palette confirmation searches were run as above with the alteration that fully-tryptic specificity was employed instead of semi-tryptic (-ntt 2). Though dynamic rather than static carbamidomethylation was incorporated in both the base searches and the PTM palette searches, it gained the ability to appear at N-termini only in the latter. The specific changes to the MS-GF + Mods.txt configuration file appear in Supporting Information.
As of a couple years ago, sequence tagging with blind modification search was frequently recommended for discovering the modifications present in a shotgun proteome. We opted to use the combination of DirecTag and TagRecon to perform this blind search because of our prior experience with the combination [10]. The configurations are available in Supporting Information. Because blind search allows the software to place an arbitrary mass shift on peptides, the search space can be rather large; we limited the scope by requiring each peptide to conform to trypsin specificity on both termini. Fragment m/z was limited to 0.03 in Thermo data for the FragmentMzTolerance, CTerminusMzTolerance, NTerminusMzTolerance, and PrecursorMzTolerance; for SCIEX data, the values were doubled. These settings were not optimized, which quite likely diminished performance. Output files were generated in pepXML format.
MSFragger was one of the first search engines to be published explicitly to accelerate the use of database search engines without constraining precursor mass [16]. We employed the build from February 22, 2019. Precursors were constrained to 10 ppm for Thermo data and to 20 ppm for SCIEX data. In both cases, the fragments were allowed to be twice as variable in m/z as the precursors. The software was limited to allowing a single neutron error in isotope correction. Again, PTMs were limited to oxidation for Met, with a static change for carbamidomethylation of Cys. Configuration files are available in Supporting Information. Output files were generated in pepXML format.
The pFind algorithm from the Institute of Computing Technology at the Chinese Academy of Sciences has steadily gained in speed and discrimination since its initial publication in 2005 [36]. Our evaluation incorporated pFind v3.1.5, released on January 24, 2019, which incorporates the open search features described in their 2018 publication [17], along with a pParse patch from Xin-Yi Xu (http://pfind.ict.ac.cn/software/pParse/) expected to be incorporated in the main build at a later date to enable TripleTOF mzML import. On the MS Data tab of pFind configuration, we set MS Data Format to RAW for Thermo experiments but mzML for SCIEX experiments, using ProteoWizard msConvertGUI to produce mzMLs for this algorithm only (see Supporting Information). In all cases, “MS Instrument” was set to “HCD-FTMS” since HCD bears considerable similarity to beam-type CID for the TripleTOF. Under “Data Extraction,” we deactivated MS1/MS2 and MGF export. On the Identification tab, we specified the FASTA database used above (to which pFind had already concatenated contaminants and reversed versions of all proteins). For “narrow” searches, we specified “Semi-Specific” search using either 10 ppm/20 ppm precursor and fragment tolerances (Thermo) or 20 ppm/40 ppm tolerances (SCIEX). For “open” searches, we specified “Fully-Specific” with the same tolerances and checking the “Open Search” box. In all cases, Cys carbamidomethylation was a “fixed” modification, while Met oxidation was a “variable” modification.
3.4. PSM filtering and protein inference
IDPicker 3.1.18172 represented the simple target-decoy collective FDR technique for filtering PSMs [13]. The software as installed is capable of reading MS-GF + mzID files and reading TagRecon pepXML files. It “recognized” MSFragger pep.xml files as having been produced by X!Tandem, meaning that it rewarded PSMs with lower expectation values and with higher hyperscores. The scores were combined optimally through a Monte Carlo weight adjustment. Default IDPicker filtering was applied, requiring PSMs to be filtered to a 2% FDR (based on reversed proteins having the “XXX_” prefix) and requiring each protein to be supported by at least two distinct peptide sequences, applying parsimony rules. The Modification View was used to evaluate patterns of PTMs from TagRecon blind search.
Philosopher 20190301 represents a more subtle way to filter PSMs, assemble protein lists, and summarize PTMs, fitting theoretical distributions to the distributions of discriminant scores. In “narrow” searches, Philosopher was able to give a higher probability to PSMs with measured and calculated peptide masses in close agreement. In open searches, Philosopher could instead give a higher probability to PSMs with measured minus calculated masses that were very common among the spectra, such as giving a bonus to peptides that were apparently oxidized variants of database peptides. Because the software does not natively read mzIdentML format, the ProteoWizard idConvert tool was used to produce pepXML files from the MS-GF + search results. Scripts were employed to run to run each of these Philosopher commands in succession: workspace (initialize), database (annotate), peptideprophet, proteinprophet, filter, and report. These scripts are supplied in Supporting Information. PSM and other counts were derived from the tab-separated values files created in the report step.
pFind filtering options are set at the time of the search, as seen in tools like MaxQuant. We specified an FDR of <2% on the basis of “Peptides.” We configured the “Number of Peptides” to be greater than or equal to 2 (though this rule does not seem to be applied). The proteins FDR was left at its <1% default value.

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

