=== TITLE ===
The hypoxic cancer secretome induces pre-metastatic bone lesions through lysyl oxidase

=== ABSTRACT ===
Tumour metastasis is a complex process involving reciprocal interplay between cancer cells and host stroma at both primary and secondary sites, and is strongly influenced by microenvironmental factors such as hypoxia. Tumour-secreted proteins play a crucial role in these interactions and present strategic therapeutic potential. Metastasis of breast cancer to the bone affects approximately 85% of patients with advanced disease and renders them largely untreatable. Specifically, osteolytic bone lesions, where bone is destroyed, lead to debilitating skeletal complications and increased patient morbidity and mortality. The molecular interactions governing the early events of osteolytic lesion formation are currently unclear. Here we show hypoxia to be specifically associated with bone relapse in ER-negative breast cancer patients. Global quantitative analysis of the hypoxic secretome identified Lysyl Oxidase (LOX) as significantly associated with bone-tropism and relapse. High expression of LOX in primary breast tumours or systemic delivery of LOX leads to osteolytic lesion formation whereas silencing or inhibition of LOX activity abrogates tumour-driven osteolytic lesion formation. We identify LOX as a novel regulator of NFATc1-driven osteoclastogenesis, independent of RANK Ligand, which disrupts normal bone homeostasis leading to the formation of focal pre-metastatic lesions. We show that these lesions subsequently provide a platform for circulating tumour cells to colonise and form bone metastases. Our study identifies a novel mechanism of regulation of bone homeostasis and metastasis, opening up opportunities for novel therapeutic intervention with important clinical implications.

=== INTRODUCTION ===
Using a primary tumour hypoxic signature, retrospective analysis of a cohort of lymph-node-negative breast cancer patients who received no systemic adjuvant therapy revealed a significant association with metastasis specifically within oestrogen receptor (ER)-negative (ER-) but not ER-positive (ER+) patients (Fig. 1a). Moreover, analysis of metastatic site showed significant association with bone metastases over lung, liver and brain (Fig. 1b and Extended Data Fig. 1a). We performed global differential quantitative mass-spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of the hypoxic secretome associated with osteotropism using the human ER- MDA-MB-231 parent and matched bone tropic (clone 1833) (MDA-BT) breast cancer cell lines (Fig. 1c). LOX was one of the most highly upregulated secreted proteins in MDA-BT cells (Fig. 1d, Supplementary Information 1 and Extended Data Fig. 1b–d). Querying the publically available data sets for the full panel of MDA-MB-231 clonal lines, which exhibit differing levels of osteotropism, we found LOX was significantly associated with increasing osteotropism (Fig. 1e). LOX has previously been strongly implicated in cancer metastasis, identifying it as an important candidate for further investigation.

Retrospective analysis of LOX in our patient cohort confirmed it is significantly associated with metastasis in ER- patients but not ER+ breast cancer patients (Extended Data Fig. 2a, b), consistent with previous reports. Furthermore LOX is significantly associated with reported bone relapse across all patients and ER-, but not ER+, patients (Fig. 1f). Cox-regression analysis showed LOX is associated with increased hazard ratio in ER- patients for metastasis in general and bone relapse (Extended Data Fig. 2c). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis showed LOX is indicative of metastatic dissemination (including to the bone) in ER- but not ER+ breast cancer (Extended Data Fig. 3a). Importantly, our observations were confirmed in a second data set (Extended Data Fig. 3b). Our findings strongly implicate LOX in bone metastases in ER- breast cancer patients.

We further investigated our findings in the immune-competent 4T1-BALB/c syngeneic model of spontaneously metastasizing ER- breast cancer which expresses high levels of LOX (Extended Data Fig. 4a). The MDA-MB-231 lines are not suitable as a progression model since bone metastases do not occur from orthotopic implantation. Micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) analysis of bones from 4T1 tumour-bearing mice showed decreased trabecular and cortical bone volume, trabecular number and trabecular thickness, and increased focal osteolytic lesions over time (Fig. 2a–c and Extended Data Fig. 4b–e). Significant changes were detectable from 2 weeks after implantation when tumour hypoxia is a salient feature (Extended Data Fig. 4f). Bone marrow explants and quantitative PCR with reverse transcription (qRT–PCR) confirmed osteolytic lesion formation preceded the arrival of tumour cells (Extended Data Fig. 4g–i). Strikingly, osteolytic lesion formation and cortical bone loss were also induced in a tumour-free model through injection of hypoxic tumour-conditioned media (‘CM’) (Fig. 2b, c). Our data show early osteolytic lesions are formed in the absence of tumour cells by hypoxia-induced tumour-secreted factors.

To determine LOX-dependency, mice were implanted with 4T1shLOX tumours, with decreased LOX expression and decreased LOX in sera (Extended Data Figs 4a and 5a). Micro-CT analysis revealed decreased osteolytic lesions in these mice (Fig. 2d, e), with no effect on primary tumour growth (Extended Data Fig. 5b). Immunological inhibition of LOX in 4T1 scrambled control (4T1scr) tumour-bearing mice with our antibody that binds specifically to LOX and blocks enzymatic function, also decreased focal osteolytic lesion formation (Fig. 2f). Consistently, in tumour-free models, injection of 4T1shLOX CM generated fewer focal osteolytic lesions than 4T1scr CM (Fig. 2g).

We confirmed our findings in another, previously published human colorectal cancer model with manipulated LOX expression. SW480 is a non-metastatic colorectal cancer cell line with low LOX expression, whose metastatic ability is increased by overexpression of wild-type LOX (+LOX) but not a catalytically inactive mutant (K320A) (+mutLOX). SW480+LOX CM injection showed increased frequency and size of osteolytic lesions compared with SW480+mutLOX or SW480+EV CMs (Fig. 2h and Extended Data Fig. 5c). While bone metastases in patients with colorectal cancer are rare, our data show that high levels of secreted active LOX drive focal osteolytic lesion formation in the bone independently of tumour presence across multiple cancer types. Injection of recombinant LOX (rLOX) into both immune-compromised nude and immune-competent BALB/c mice also led to the formation of focal osteolytic lesions (Fig. 2i) and increased circulating carboxy terminal telopeptide (CTX), a biomarker of bone turnover (Extended Data Fig. 5d). Our data clearly demonstrate tumour-secreted LOX as a mediator of osteolytic lesions.

Bone homeostasis is a balance between bone resorption by osteoclasts and bone formation by osteoblasts. This balance is typically disrupted in cancer metastasis. Addition of rLOX (in the absence of RANK ligand (RANKL)) to pre-osteoclast cultures was a highly effective stimulator of osteoclastogenesis, generating greater numbers of osteoclasts (Fig. 3a) with a higher resorptive capacity than RANKL-stimulated cultures (Fig. 3b, c). Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) for RANKL in rLOX-treated culture supernatants showed no RANKL, ruling out autocrine production of RANKL, and mass spectrometry analysis of rLOX preparations excluded the presence of contaminating effectors (Extended Data Fig. 6a, b). Our data show LOX can stimulate the generation of fully differentiated, active osteoclasts independently of RANKL.

Osteoclastogenesis is driven by the nuclear translocation of NFATc1, the master regulator of osteoclastogenesis. Addition of rLOX (in the absence of RANKL) induced greater nuclear localization of NFATc1 than RANKL (Fig. 3d and Extended Data Fig. 6c), which was disrupted by treatment with our LOX-targeting antibody in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 3e and Extended Data Fig. 6c). A by-product of LOX activity is the reactive oxygen species hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Reactive oxygen species have previously been suggested to influence osteoclast differentiation and function. Treatment of human pre-osteoclast cultures with rLOX in the presence of catalase (which rapidly degrades H2O2) abrogated rLOX-driven NFATc1 nuclear localization in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 3f). Our data identifies a novel, LOX-activity-dependent mechanism of de novo osteoclastogenesis which occurs independently of RANKL. Addition of rLOX to primary calvarial mouse osteoblasts decreased proliferation and led to an increase in terminal differentiation, which was attenuated by our LOX blocking antibody (Fig. 3g and Extended Data Fig. 6d). Similarly, high LOX 4T1scr CM decreased proliferation and increased differentiation of the human osteoblast SaOS-2 cell line (Extended Data Fig. 6e, f), which was attenuated by treatment with our LOX antibody. Our data show LOX leads to a loss of proliferative phenotype and increased terminal differentiation of osteoblasts.

Consistent with LOX tipping the balance of bone homeostasis in the favour of osteoclast resorption, quantification of osteoblasts and osteoclasts on the endocortical surface of tibiae from tumour-bearing mice showed decreased osteoblast and increased osteoclast number in 4T1scr tumour-bearing mice (Fig. 3h–j). Partial reversion was evident in mice treated with our LOX antibody and in mice bearing 4T1shLOX tumours (Fig. 3h–m and Extended Data Fig. 7a). Thus, tumour-secreted LOX is an important modulator of bone homeostasis. Treatment of tumour-bearing and CM-injected mice with clinically relevant concentrations of the bisphosphonate zoledronic acid abrogated focal osteolytic lesion formation (Fig. 4a–c) without affecting primary tumour growth (Extended Data Fig. 7b). Our data highlight the potential for therapeutic intervention of LOX-mediated osteoclast-driven pre-metastatic lesion formation in the bone.

The functional consequence of LOX-mediated pre-metastatic focal osteolytic lesion formation was tested by pre-conditioning BALB/c mice with either 4T1scr CM with or without LOX antibody, or 4T1shLOX CM to stimulate focal osteolytic lesion formation. 4T1 luciferase-expressing tumour cells (4T1Luc) were then injected intracardially. Bioluminescent IVIS imaging and micro-CT analysis revealed increased tumour burden in 4T1scr CM-conditioned mice compared with LOX antibody treated or 4T1shLOX CM-conditioned mice (Fig. 4d–f). A Pearson correlation coefficient showed a positive correlation between IVIS signal and lesion number (Extended Data Fig. 7c). Our data demonstrate that LOX-mediated pre-metastatic focal osteolytic lesions generate niches within the bone microenvironment that support colonization of circulating tumour cells and the formation of overt bone metastases. Treatment with bisphosphonate during 4T1scr CM conditioning of mice significantly reduced the ability of intracardially injected 4T1Luc cells to colonize the bone 1 week after injection and to develop bone metastases 5 weeks after injection (Fig. 4g, h). Thus, bisphosphonate treatment of patients with high-LOX-expressing tumours after surgery could prevent the establishment and growth of circulating tumour cells within the bone.

Pre-metastatic preparation of secondary sites to facilitate subsequent tumour cell colonization has been reported by us and others in several organs across multiple cancers; however, so far, the formation of pre-metastatic focal osteolytic lesions directly by tumour-secreted factors has not been described. We are the first to demonstrate, to our knowledge, that LOX activity modulates bone homeostasis, acting directly on osteoblasts and osteoclasts (Fig. 4i). Global bone loss before tumour cell arrival has been previously linked to indirect effects of tumour-secreted factors through RANKL-dependent mechanisms. We present a novel mechanism of deregulation of bone homeostasis independent of RANKL, yet acknowledge that other factors probably contribute to this inherently complex process. Interestingly, the post-translationally cleaved LOX propeptide, known for its opposing inhibitory effects to that of the mature LOX enzyme, has been reported to modulate osteoblast behaviour through an intracellular mechanism inhibiting mineralization ability. Yet embryonic day (E)18.5 Lox-/- mice exhibit markedly decreased mineral nodule formation and osteoblast differentiation, supporting our data and suggesting context-dependent effects. LOX is reportedly expressed in osteoblasts and induced by TGF-β released during bone resorption, which could further stimulate osteoclastogenesis leading to unbalanced coupling of bone homeostasis and focal osteolytic lesions. Since LOX-dependent pre-metastatic lesions form in the bone at the same time as those formed in the lungs and liver, we believe that these osteolytic lesions are independent, forming simultaneously through unrelated mechanisms.

Our data suggest LOX may well be a useful marker for predicting the likelihood of metastases to the bone in ER- breast cancer patients and identifying these patients for adjuvant bisphosphonate treatment. Our data highlight that the dosing and administration of LOX inhibitors under development will be critical as genetic targeting yielded more potent effects than our antibody in this study, and earlier work has shown that treatment with the non-specific LOX inhibitor β-aminopropionitrile can reduce bone colonization in intracardiac models when administered at the time of inoculation. In summary, our insight into the very early mechanisms of bone metastases before, and independent of tumour cell arrival, identifies a new step in bone metastasis and novel opportunities for therapeutic intervention.

=== METHODS ===
Methods

For in vivo experiments, sample size was estimated to be eight mice per treatment group to ensure more than 80% power with 95% confidence, based on 25% practical difference and 15% coefficient of variation.

Patient data analysis

Evaluation of the expression of a previously published hypoxic signature and LOX with respect to metastasis and organ specific relapse was conducted using a published cohort of 344 primary breast cancers from lymph-node-negative patients who had not received systemic adjuvant therapy and with available gene expression data and site of relapse information. Details on patients and gene expression analysis can be found in. P values were derived from a Mann–Whitney test and were two-tailed. An additional Kruskal–Wallis test between reported bone relapse, relapse elsewhere and no relapse patients with an additional contrast test wherein all pairwise groups were considered was conducted for LOX expression. Cox-regression using log2(LOX expression data) was used to estimate the hazard ratio in two analyses. One analysis used the no-relapse patients and the bone relapse patients, and the second analysis included all patients. An alternative second patient data set reporting data on 295 lymph-node-negative patients who did not receive adjuvant therapy, with available site of relapse, was used to confirm our LOX-based findings.

In vitro culturing of tumour cells

Unless stated otherwise in the following sections, all cell lines were routinely cultured in DMEM with 100 U ml-1 penicillin and 100 mg ml-1 streptomycin, plus 10% FBS. For CM collection experiments, cells were transferred to serum-free DMEM without phenol red and incubated at either 21% oxygen (normoxia) or 1% oxygen (hypoxia) for 24 h in a Hypoxystation (Don Whitley Scientific). All CMs were filtered before use. For SILAC for mass spectrometry studies, tumour cells were grown in DMEM containing labelled isotopic amino acids, either light isotope (12C-,14N-arginine; 12C-,14N-lysine) (R0/K0) or heavy isotope (13C-,15N-arginine; 13C-,15N-lysine) (R10/K8) for five passages before incorporation was assessed. A minimum of 97–98% labelled arginine and lysine incorporation, with less than 1% proline conversion, was required for subsequent proteomics studies. The MDA-MB-231 BT cell line was obtained from J. Massague at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. The 4T1 wild-type cell line was obtained from F. Miller at the University of Michigan. The SaOS-2 cell line was obtained from J. Gallagher at Liverpool University. The MDA-MB-231 parental cell line was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) (distributed by LGC Standards), where cell lines are authenticated on a regular basis. The 4T1Luc line was from SibTech. The 4T1 wild-type cell line was used to generate the 4T1shLOX line as previously published. The SW480+EV, +LOX and +mutLOX cell lines were previously generated and authenticated using short tandem repeat analysis. All cell lines were routinely tested for mycoplasma and tested negative for murine pathogens by IMPACT testing (IDEXX Laboratories).

Mass Spectrometry acquisition and secretome analysis

After collection, label-free and SILAC-labelled CMs were filtered and reduced in volume using 10 kDa molecular mass cut-off filters. The remaining protein was dissolved in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 10 mM HEPES pH 8, after which exact protein amounts were determined using a Bradford assay. In SILAC-labelled repeats, the two SILAC labels (R10/K8 and R0/K0) were mixed 1:1. In label-free repeats, the samples were left unmixed as depicted in Fig. 1c, but equal amounts of starting material were used for processing. Proteins were reduced in 1 mM DTT (Sigma) for 45 min at room temperature (21°C), alkylated for 45 min using 5.5 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma), and digested with 1:50 (enzyme:protein ratio) of mass spectrometry (MS)-grade trypsin (Sigma) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid at a final concentration of 2%, and 5 mg of peptides were loaded onto a 50 cm C18 reverse-phase analytical column (Thermo EasySpray ES803) using an EASY nanoLC 1000. Peptides were eluted over a 4 h gradient ranging from 6 to 60% of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and the Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was run in a DD-MS2 top10 method. Full MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 70,000, with an AGC target of 3 x 106 or maximum injection time of 20 ms and a scan range of 300–1750 m/z. The MS spectra were obtained at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target value of 1 x 106 or maximum injection time of 60 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s, and ions with a charge state <2 or unknown were excluded. MS performance was verified for consistency by running complex cell lysate quality control standards, and chromatography was monitored to check for reproducibility. Raw data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5 and Perseus version 1.4. Results were analysed using scripts written in-house in Python, and statistically tested for significance using the quantile function in the R statistical framework. To ensure high confidence identifications and quantification, a MaxQuant score of >50 and a minimum of two unique peptides per protein seen by tandem MS in all repeats were required. Initial analysis was undertaken using a label-free approach (two repeats) for global pairwise analyses, and data subsequently validated in a standard and reverse-label SILAC approach (two repeats). Identified intracellular contaminants were removed and secreted proteins retained by using the cellular compartment annotations in Ensembl and PantherDB, and Gene Ontology annotation enrichment for extracellular-associated terms. Raw mass spectrometry data along with in-house python scripts are available online at ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) with the data set identifier PXD000397.

Microarray data analysis of MDA-MB-231 cells

Previously published microarray data for parental and in vivo selected osteotropic subclones of the human MDA-MB-231 breast cancer line were retrieved (GEO accession number GSE2603). The subclones have previously been described and shown to be either weakly, mildly or strongly osteotropic. All data sets were normalized and centred to the median of LOX probes.

In vivo models

Before the start of experiments, mice were randomly allocated into cages. Each mouse within the same cage received the same treatment. Cages were subsequently randomly allocated for treatment. Sample size was estimated to be eight mice per treatment group to ensure >80% power with 95% confidence, based on 25% practical difference and 15% coefficient of variation. For tumour-bearing studies, 2 x 105 4T1scr or 4T1shLOX or 4T1Luc cells were injected into the mammary fat pad of 8-week-old female BALB/c mice (Taconic). The tumour-free model has been previously described, where 300 μl of tumour-cell CM is injected intraperitoneally daily into mice for 3 weeks. Rabbit anti-LOX (aLOX) antibody or rabbit IgG control treatments were administered intraperitoneally twice a week at 1 mg kg-1 2 days after implantation. The LOX antibody (synthesized by OpenBiosystems) targets a conserved peptide sequence from the active site of human and mouse proteins, blocking function as previously described, and has been shown not to bind other LOX family members. For bisphosphonate studies, 0.6 mg kg-1 zoledronic acid was injected intraperitoneally twice a week. Primary tumour measurements were performed twice a week using calipers. All experiments were performed in accordance with UK Home Office regulations following UK Coordinating Committee for Cancer Research Guidelines for the Welfare and Use of Animals in Cancer Research, or under authorization and guidance from the Danish Inspectorate for Animal Experimentation. Cell line sources are stated above in ‘In vitro culturing of tumour cells’ and were tested negative for murine pathogens by IMPACT testing (IDEXX Laboratories). A second previously published human model of colorectal cancer with manipulated LOX expression was used to validate LOX-dependent findings. SW480 is a non-metastatic colorectal cancer cell line with low LOX expression, whose metastatic ability can be increased through expression of wild-type LOX (SW480+LOX) but not a catalytically inactive mutant (K320A) (SW480+mutLOX)15. Eight-week-old female nude mice (Charles River) were injected daily with 300 μl SW480+EV (empty vector), SW480+LOX (full-length active LOX) or SW480+mutLOX (catalytically inactive mutant (K320A)) CM intraperitoneally for 3 weeks. Recombinant LOX (OriGene Technologies) in PBS was injected twice a week (25 μg kg-1) intraperitoneally into 8-week-old female nude (Charles River) or BALB/c mice (Taconic) for 3 weeks. Exclusion criteria for data analysis were pre-established such that those mice terminated before defined experimental endpoints for ethical and/or licence reasons such as undue pain, suffering, distress and/or apparent lasting harm, or unexpected premature death, were not used for subsequent analysis. Values of n for all figures are displayed in accompanying legends.

Micro-CT imaging of tibia

Legs were removed from euthanized mice and fixed in either 4% paraformaldehyde solution or periodate–lysine–paraformaldehyde fixative. Fixed bones were dissected free of tissue and scanned on a micro-CT scanner (model 1172 Skyscan) at 50 kV with a 0.5 aluminium filter using a detection pixel size of 5 μm. The scanned images were reconstructed using Skyscan Recon software and analysed using Skyscan CT analysis software. A standard trabecular volume of interest was chosen starting 0.2 mm from the growth plate and included all trabeculae in a 1 mm3 region of bone. Trabecular volume and number were assessed in this region. Total bone volume was also determined in a length of the bone from the top of the epiphysis to 3 mm below. Osteolytic lesions were measured through 360° of the bone on a three-dimensional model in a 3 mm length of cortical bone, starting at the growth plate. Holes smaller than 50 μm in diameter were excluded from the analysis as these represent normal physiological structures in bone. During analysis, investigators were blinded to specific treatment groups.

In vivo quantitation of osteoblast and osteoclast number

Tibiae were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde solution, decalcified in 14.3% EDTA for 4 days at 37°C with daily changes of EDTA, then embedded in paraffin wax. Sections were cut (at 3 μm) using a Leica Microsystems Microtome and stained with tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) as described previously. The numbers of osteoblasts and TRAP-positive osteoclasts were determined on a 3 mm length of endocortical surface starting 0.25 mm from the growth plate and viewed on a DMRB microscope (Leica Microsystems). All histomorphometric parameters were based on the report of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research histomorphometry nomenclature and were obtained using the OsteoMeasure bone histomorphometry software (OsteoMetrics). During preparation and analysis of tibiae, investigators were blinded to specific treatment groups.

In vitro osteoclast and osteoblast models

Osteoclasts were generated on dentine disks from the CD14+ fraction of human peripheral blood as previously described. The CD14+ cells were treated with 25 ng ml-1 recombinant M-CSF (-RANKL), plus either 30 ng ml-1 RANKL (+RANKL) or 150 ng ml-1 recombinant LOX (rLOX) (OriGene Technologies). The LOX antibody was added at 4 mg ml-1. At the end of the culture period the cells were fixed and stained for TRAP. The number of TRAP-positive osteoclasts and the amount of resorption were determined as previously described30. For NFATc1 nuclear localization, human peripheral blood monocytes were grown in standard osteoclastic conditions and the ability of LOX to induce nuclear localization of the transcription factor NFATc1 was measured at day 14 (mature, functional osteoclasts). For the role of LOX upon NFATc1 nuclear localization, cultures were treated for 24 h with rLOX; rLOX in the presence of the LOX antibody at 4 mg ml-1; or LOX antibody alone at 4 mg ml-1. To determine whether LOX-induced NFATc1 nuclear localization was mediated by reactive oxygen species, additional cultures were treated with 0, 50, 100, 150 and 200 U ml-1 catalase with and without rLOX (150 ng ml-1). Primary murine calvarial osteoblasts were isolated from neonatal BALB/c mice as previously described, and seeded into 96-well plates. To determine the effect of LOX on the differentiation and function of primary osteoblasts, cells were grown to confluence in normal medium (DMEM GlutaMAX with sodium pyruvate without phenol red, 100 U ml-1 penicillin and 100 mg ml-1 streptomycin, 10% FBS), and then switched to osteogenic medium (DMEM GlutaMAX with sodium pyruvate without phenol red (Life Technologies), 100 U ml-1 penicillin and 100 mg ml-1 streptomycin, 0.5% FBS and 50 mg ml-1 L-ascorbic acid (Sigma)) and treated with 10 nM dexamethasone (positive control), 150 ng ml-1 rLOX, or rLOX + LOX antibody. Cells were cultured in osteogenic medium for 3 weeks with the medium and treatments replaced every 2–3 days, and 5 mM inorganic phosphate added to all treatments 3 days before the end of the culture. Human osteoblast-like cells (SaOS-2), maintained as previously described30, were treated with CM from 4T1 cells as previously described and the effect after 3 days on cell number was measured. SaOS-2 cells were also grown in osteogenic medium and the effect of the CM on the differentiation of these cells and their ability to mineralize was assessed after 7 days by quantification of alizarin red staining.

Quantification of mineralisation

Cells were rinsed in PBS and fixed in 100% ethanol overnight at 4°C. Nodules formed by osteoblasts were stained by alizarin red S. Briefly, cells were rinsed twice by PBS and incubated in 40 mM alizarin red S (pH 4.2) (Sigma) for 1 h at room temperature. Plates were washed with 95% ethanol on the shaker until the solution became clear; 10% cetylpyridinium chloride was then added to the wells and incubated at 55°C for 15 min, after which the absorbance was read at 550 nm.

NFATc1 staining and quantification

Cultures on coverslips were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min. Fixed cultures were rinsed three times between each subsequent step with 0.1% Tween in PBS and all incubations were at room temperature unless otherwise stated. Permeabilization was performed with 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 10 min. Blocking was performed with 5% normal goat serum in PBS+0.1% Tween for 2 h. Mouse monoclonal antibody to NFATc1 (SC- 7294, Santa Cruz) and Mouse IgG1 control were diluted 1:50 in 5% normal goat serum + 0.1% Tween and incubated at +4°C overnight. The secondary incubation was with Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse 1:300 in PBS for 1 h. The final incubation with rhodamine phalloidin 1:40 (R415, Invitrogen) and Hoechst 1:1,000 was for 20 min. Coverslips were mounted using ProLong Gold (Life Technologies). Images were captured with a Leica DMI 4000B fluorescence microscope at x20 objective with 0.70 aperture. NFATc1-positive nuclei were counted with ImageJ. Each experiment was conducted with three independent donors. For each donor, each treatment group was set up in duplicate. For each duplicate, a minimum of 16 fields of view were quantified for nuclear NFATc1 signal.

Bioluminescent intravital imaging of bone colonisation

Adult female BALB/c mice (8 weeks old) were conditioned as described above. After 3 weeks of conditioning, mice were anaesthetized and 1 x 105 4T1Luc cells were injected intracardially into the left cardiac ventricle. Once a week, mice were injected with 120 mg kg-1 luciferin and metastatic dissemination of the cells was monitored using IVIS Lumina II (Caliper LifeSciences). Mice were killed by CO2 asphyxiation 3–5 weeks after tumour cell injection. Metastatic burden was quantified using Living Image software (Caliper Life Sciences) by measuring the luminescent signal from each leg; regions of interest are shown in Fig. 4. During analysis of IVIS data, investigators were blinded to specific treatment groups.

Immunoblotting

Immunoblotting for lysyl oxidase was as previously described. Conditioned media and cellular lysates were prepared as previously described. Primary LOX antibody (Open Biosystems) was used at 1:100 and β-actin (Abcam) at 1:10,000, with incubation overnight at 4°C. Species-specific biotinylated secondary antibodies were used at 1:25,000 and incubated for 1 h at room temperature, and visualization performed using ECL Plus (Amersham, GE Healthcare).

Immunohistochemistry for tumour hypoxia

Mice were injected intraperitoneally with pimonidazole (60 mg kg-1) 1 h before culling. After excision, tumours were fixed in 4% PFA overnight before processing and embedding in paraffin according to standard histopathology techniques. Sections (4 μm) were cut and deparaffinized, rehydrated and stained with Hypoxyprobe (Hypoxyprobe) overnight after citrate-buffer-mediated antigen retrieval according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. Hypoxyprobe binding was visualized with 3,3-diaminobenzidine before counterstaining with haematoxylin. Images were taken on a NanoZoomer slide scanner (Hamamatsu).

Explant cultures

The 4T1Luc line was implanted orthotopically as described above. Explant cultures of 4T1 tumour-bearing mice were generated at 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 weeks after implant in the following ways. From primary tumour, small 5 mm3 biopsies were taken and mechanically disaggregated to produce a single cell suspension. From lung, the left lobe was removed, washed and mechanically disaggregated to produce a single cell suspension. From bone, hindlimbs were separated at the joint and all extraneous tissue removed. Tibiae were opened at both end and bone marrow as well as tumour cells were flushed by syringe three times using PBS. From skin, a small 5 mm2 punch of distant skin was mechanically disaggregated to produce a single cell suspension. Collected cells were washed and plated in standard serum containing media. Forty-eight hours after seeding, media were changed to remove non-adhered cells and 500 mg ml-1 Zeocin (the selective marker for the luciferase cassette) was added for 2 weeks. D-Luciferin salt (Caliper Life Sciences) at a final concentration of 3 mg ml-1 was added just before bio-luminescent imaging using the IVIS Lumina II, and quantification of luminescent signal used Living Image software (Caliper Life Sciences).

Q-RTPCR

Total RNA was isolated from cells using TRizol (Invitrogen) and purified RNA treated with DNase I (New England Biolabs), both according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Complementary DNA synthesis were performed using an M-MLV Reverse Transcriptase Kit (Invitrogen). qRT–PCR for β-actin and firefly luciferase was performed using a LightCycler 480 (Roche). Firefly luciferase was amplified using the primers 5’-CTCACTGAGACTACATCAGC-3’ and 5’-TCCAGATCCACAACCTTCGC-3’, and for β-actin 5’-GAGGCCCAGA GCAAGAGAGG-3’ and 5’-TACATGGCTGGGGTGTTGAA-3’.

ELISA

ELISA plates were coated with sera from 4T1scr and 4T1shLOX tumour- bearing mice at 4°C overnight. Plates were blocked with 1% BSA at 37°C for 3 h. Our anti-LOX antibody was prepared in PBS containing 0.1% BSA, and 100 μl was added to wells for 2 h at room temperature. Binding of anti-LOX antibody to LOX protein was detected using horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-labelled secondary antibodies (1:10,000 dilution). The CTX-I ELISA (RatLaps) was used for quantitative determination of bone-related degradation products from CTX of type I collagen in mouse serum released by osteoclasts. All procedures were performed in accordance with the manufacturer’s guidelines using sera from animals taken at time of cull. A sandwich ELISA for detecting human RANKL in the osteoclast medium was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions (DuoSet, R&D Systems Europe). The sensitivity of the RANKL ELISA was 78.1–5,000 pg ml-1.

Extended Data

=== RESULTS ===


=== CONCLUSION ===

