=== TITLE ===
Label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics with novel pairwise abundance normalization reveals synergistic RAS and CIP2A signaling

=== ABSTRACT ===
Hyperactivated RAS drives progression of many human malignancies. However, oncogenic activity of RAS is dependent on simultaneous inactivation of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) activity. Although PP2A is known to regulate some of the RAS effector pathways, it has not been systematically assessed how these proteins functionally interact. Here we have analyzed phosphoproteomes regulated by either RAS or PP2A, by phosphopeptide enrichment followed by mass-spectrometry-based label-free quantification. To allow data normalization in situations where depletion of RAS or PP2A inhibitor CIP2A causes a large uni-directional change in the phosphopeptide abundance, we developed a novel normalization strategy, named pairwise normalization. This normalization is based on adjusting phosphopeptide abundances measured before and after the enrichment. The superior performance of the pairwise normalization was verified by various independent methods. Additionally, we demonstrate how the selected normalization method influences the downstream analyses and interpretation of pathway activities. Consequently, bioinformatics analysis of RAS and CIP2A regulated phosphoproteomes revealed a significant overlap in their functional pathways. This is most likely biologically meaningful as we observed a synergistic survival effect between CIP2A and RAS expression as well as KRAS activating mutations in TCGA pan-cancer data set, and synergistic relationship between CIP2A and KRAS depletion in colony growth assays.

=== INTRODUCTION ===


=== METHODS ===
TiO 2 enrichment is regarded as a major source of variation for label-free quantification, and indeed it constituted a large part of variance in our platform ( Supplementary Fig. 1 ). Therefore, an appropriate normalization of phosphopeptide abundance needs to be applied. By using the dataset obtained from the TiO 2 -enriched samples, we investigated how different normalization methods affect the outcomes of label-free phosphoproteomics studies. First, we tested the commonly used normalization methods, including centering normalizations (global median ratio centering and quantile-based normalization, henceforth global centering and quantile centering, respectively) and the normalization by spiked internal standards (α-casein phosphopeptides). The fold change distributions of phosphopeptide ion features were monitored for the CIP2A, RAS, and OA samples compared to the control 1 samples. In the non-normalized data we observed mostly upregulations compared to the control 1 samples ( Fig. 3a,b ). As expected, the normalizations had a large impact on the distributions in terms of shifting their mean/median values ( Fig. 3a ). These shifts were reflected in the ratio of up- and down-regulated phosphorylations (differentially regulated phosphosites compared to the control 1 samples; t-test, p < 0.01) ( Fig. 3b ). The global centering and the quantile centering normalizations of the data yielded similar ratios of the regulated phosphorylations across all the treatments (50–63% upregulation). In contrast, the casein normalization failed to correct the unlikely result of pronounced upregulation in all samples in the non-normalized data ( Supplementary Fig. 2a ). Variations in spiking α-casein, presumably due to the limited accuracy in protein concentration measurement of cell lysates, seem to have contributed to this trend ( Supplementary Fig. 2b ). Thereby we conclude that use of any of the tested normalization methods do not reveal the expected profound upregulation of protein phosphorylation by OA treatment and downregulation by CIP2A and RAS depletions.

Based on the above results, we selected the global pairwise normalization as the appropriate normalization method for label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics. To gain an understanding of the biological processes regulated by CIP2A, RAS, and OA phosphoproteomes, the global-pairwise-normalized data was next subjected to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Qiagen). Interestingly, the results from this analysis supported the novel findings ( Fig. 4a ) that the phosphoproteomes regulated by CIP2A and RAS are involved in highly similar biological functions, including regulation of cell death, survival, and proliferation ( Fig. 6a ). In contrast, the OA treatment had the opposite effect on several of these functional categories. However, when the non-enriched digest data with global centering normalization was analyzed by pathway analysis, this revealed that at the level of protein expression, CIP2A and RAS have more diverse effects ( Fig. 6a ), partly due to RAS depletion regulating the expression of a larger number of proteins than CIP2A depletion or OA treatment ( Supplementary Fig. 6 ). Many proteins regulated uniquely by RAS were associated to carbohydrate metabolism and other metabolic pathways ( Supplementary Fig. 7 ).

To identify the key regulators of the common functions of CIP2A and RAS, we performed Ingenuity upstream regulator analysis of the CIP2A-RAS shared phosphoproteome regulation and, strikingly, the suggested upstream kinases were almost solely members of the RAS downstream pathways MAPK/ERK, PI3K/AKT, and MAPK/JNK2, as well as tyrosine kinases functioning upstream of RAS ( Fig. 6b ) 54 . However, these Ingenuity analyses are designed for expression level data, which raises concerns about its applicability to phosphorylation data. Therefore, we also monitored the phosphorylation changes specifically at ERK and AKT targeted sites. The sites predicted by two tools, NetworKIN 55 and GPS 56 , as well as the sites curated from literature into PhosphoSitePlus database 57 , were taken into consideration ( Supplementary Table 3 ). The threshold for prediction scores was determined by comparing the predictions to the known target proteins curated from literature ( Supplementary Fig. 8 ). This resulted in 53/150/18 AKT target sites and 60/251/19 ERK targets sites for NetworKIN, GPS, and PhosphositePlus, respectively. In the global-pairwise-normalized data, the average phosphorylation levels at the AKT and ERK sites were downregulated by CIP2A and RAS depletion (AKT: 1.2–1.6 fold, ERK: 1.7–2.0 fold) and upregulated by OA (AKT 1.3–4.6 fold, ERK 1.4 fold except for GPS)( Fig. 6c ). This is again consistent with the expected results illustrated in Fig. 1a . The same trend was not observed with the global centering normalization ( Fig. 6c ). Interestingly, the phosphorylation levels at the ERK and AKT target sites in the global-pairwise-normalized data correlated between the CIP2A and RAS samples ( Supplementary Fig. 9 and Supplementary Table 10 ) suggesting that the same AKT and ERK targets are under the regulation of CIP2A and RAS. These results support the idea that applying different normalizations can leads to distinct biological conclusions in the phosphoproteomics studies.

To assess whether the overlapping pathway regulation by CIP2A and RAS is biologically meaningful, we analyzed The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) pan-cancer data for potential interactions between CIP2A expression and RAS isoform expression/mutations on patient survival analysis. The survival analysis was limited to 10-year follow-up time. High expression of CIP2A, NRAS, and to lesser extent KRAS was associated with poor prognosis in TCGA pan-cancer data set ( Fig. 7a ). Furthermore, we observed a synergistic survival effect between CIP2A and KRAS or NRAS expression. The combination of high CIP2A and high K- or N-RAS expression was associated with the worst survival and the combination of low CIP2A and low K- or N-RAS expression with the best survival ( Fig. 7a ). We did not see clear synergy between CIP2A and HRAS expression. Although overexpression of RAS proteins has been shown to contribute to cancer 58 59 , the oncogenic RAS signaling is commonly activated by mutation. Therefore, we also analyzed the relationship between CIP2A expression and RAS mutations. Mutational data and gene expression data (pan-cancer normalized) are available for a limited number of patients only; nevertheless, KRAS activating mutations exhibited similar synergistic relationship with CIP2A expression levels as did high KRAS expression ( Fig. 7a ). The poor survival of KRAS mutants is partly explained by enrichment of lung adenocarcinoma in these groups. However, the cancer type does not account for the survival effect of CIP2A. In contrast to the observed survival, the weighted average of expected 5 year survival rate was higher for CIP2A high/KRAS mutant than for CIP2A low/KRAS mutant patient group ( Supplementary Table 11 ), suggesting that high CIP2A expression is an indicator of poor prognosis in KRAS mutant cancers. Taken together, the combination of low CIP2A expression with low expression or wild-type KRAS resulted in a survival advantage in the TCGA data.

In order to examine the potential causal relationship we performed a series of colony formation experiments on HeLa as well as CW-2, HCA7, and NCI-H747 colorectal cancer cell lines. Three different siRNAs were used for CIP2A with no apparent difference in colony formation efficiency. On average, depletion of both CIP2A and KRAS impaired the colony formation more efficiently than depletion of either alone ( Fig. 7b ). This synergistic relationship between CIP2A and KRAS depletion was most evident in HeLa and CW-2 cells ( Fig. 7c ). NCI-H747 cells, which harbor an activating KRAS mutation, were most affected by KRAS depletion and concomitant CIP2A knockdown did not reduce the colony formation much further ( Fig. 7c ). Interestingly, when all three forms of RAS were depleted, the effect on colony formation was comparable to the combination of CIP2A and KRAS ( Supplementary Fig. 10 ). The triple RAS depletion also did not seem to synergize with CIP2A depletion ( Supplementary Fig. 10 ). These findings suggest that either the combination of CIP2A/KRAS or HRAS/KRAS/NRAS depletion is sufficient to saturate the effect on colony formation and support the view that CIP2A and the RAS proteins regulate functionally overlapping pathways.

HeLa, NCI-H747, and HCA7 were obtained from ATCC (USA) and CW-2 cells from RIKEN bioresource center (Japan). DMEM was used for HeLa and HCA7. RPMI-1640 was used for NCI-H747 and CW-2. All media contained 10% FBS, 2 mM glutamine, 50 I.U./ml penicillin, and 50 μg/ml streptomycin. The cell lines were tested for mycoplasma contamination.

1.1 million cells were seeded on 10 cm dishes 24 hours prior to transfection. Transfection reactions were performed in 7.5 ml volume using 1.88 nmol of siRNA and 22.5 μl of Oligofectamine (Life Technologies) according to manufacturer’s instructions. RAS knockdown was performed with a cocktail siRNA targeting H-, K-, and N-RAS. The total amount of siRNA was the same (250nM) for all transfections as this did not diminish the efficiency of the triple-RAS knockdown ( Supplementary Fig. 11 ). The siRNA sequences are listed in Supplementary Table 12 . OA (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to control siRNA transfected cells at a concentration of 25nM 48 hours after transfection. Knockdowns were scaled down by a factor of 7.5 for 6-well plates.

Cells were collected by scraping in ice cold PBS 72 hours after transfection. Snap frozen cell pellets were lysed in a buffer containing 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 2 mM EGTA, 5 mM EDTA, 30 mM sodium fluoride, 60 mM B-glycerophosphate, 20 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, Roche complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablet, and 5 μM pepstatin A. Samples were sonicated with Bioruptor sonicator (Diagenode) at high intensity with 15 seconds pulses and intervals for 5 minutes and centrifuged at 100,000 g for 35 minutes. Supernatant was collected and protein concentration was determined by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm (10.0–17.6 mg/ml). Samples were kept at 4 degrees or on ice at all times.

The lysates (1 mg protein) were diluted to 200 μl with a buffer containing 8 M urea and 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, after spiking in 10 μl of 1 μg/μl bovine α-casein (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were reduced for 1 h at 37 °C, alkylated for 30 min at R.T. in the dark, and quenched, by adding 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 M iodoacetamide, and then 1 M DTT, respectively (each 10 μl, dissolved in the Tris/urea buffer). The proteins were digested for 18 h at 37 °C with 690 μl of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 containing 20 μg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega). After acidification with 80 μl of 10% TFA (total 1 ml), the samples were stored at −20 °C overnight or longer. Aliquots (10 μl) of the digests were desalted with a C18 microcolumn as described previously 26 70 with a slight modification. Briefly, three pieces of Empore C18 disk (3M) were packed into a 200-μl pipette tip, followed by pretreatment with acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA), sample loading, 3 times washing with 0.1% FA, and then elution with 0.1% FA, 80% ACN (each 50 μl loaded by gentle air pressure). The eluents were evaporated to dryness. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the samples (non-enriched digests) were reconstituted in 50 μl of 0.1% FA, of which 6 μl was transferred into an LC sample vial for 5 μl injection.

The remaining digests (990 μl) were desalted as well, with some modifications. Briefly, an Empore C18-SD 10mm/6mL cartridge (3M) was pretreated with ACN and 0.1% TFA, followed by sample loading (repeated once again), 3 times washing with 0.1% TFA, and then elution with 6% TFA, 80% ACN (each 1 ml loaded by gentle air pressure). Phosphopeptides were enriched by TiO 2 affinity chromatography as described by Imanishi et al . 26 with some modifications: 100 μl of 50 mg/ml Sachtopore-NP TiO 2 beads (20 μm, 300 Å; ZirChrom) prewashed with 10% TFA and ACN was packed into a 200-μl tip (with three pieces of GF/C disk (Whatman) as a column frit), followed by pretreatment with the TFA/ACN solution, loading whole sample, washing with TFA/ACN twice and 0.1% TFA twice, and then elution with 5% NH 4 OH (each 200 μl loaded by gentle air pressure). Immediately, the eluents were acidified with 400 μl of 10% FA, desalted with the C18 microcolumn, and then evaporated (the immediate desalting prevents induced methionine oxidation 26 ). For LC-MS/MS analysis, the samples (TiO 2 -enriched phosphopeptides) were reconstituted in 11 μl of 0.1% FA, of which 5.5 μl was transferred into an LC sample vial for 5 μl injection.

LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an EASY-nLC 1000 nanoflow LC instrument coupled to a Q Exactive quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data of the TiO 2 -enriched and non-enriched samples were searched with Mascot (v2.4.1) via Proteome Discoverer (v1.4.0.288, Thermo Fisher Scientific), against a concatenated forward-reverse SwissProt database (v2012_04, Homo sapiens ) supplemented with common contaminants (total 40,678 protein sequences). For phosphorylation site localization, phosphoRS (v3.0, the neutral loss option disabled) was enabled. Also, the data of the TiO 2 -enriched samples were searched against an in-house made spectral library of simulated phosphopeptides (14,761 spectra for 3,208 peptide sequences) with SpectraST via Proteome Discoverer (SimSpectraST searching 46 ). The two search results were merged into an identification result. More details are described in Supplementary methods .

Label-free quantification was performed using Progenesis LC-MS (v4.1). The TiO 2 -enriched and non-enriched samples were processed separately. All the chromatographic data were aligned automatically and further adjusted manually. Peptide ion features were detected in the automatic mode with the highest sensitivity. The features were assigned by importing the xlsx identification file, followed by applying a 5-ppm mass tolerance filter. For the non-enriched samples, all the features assigned to human peptides were used for global median centering of abundance ratios (global centering normalization). Protein abundance was quantified based on the sum of ion abundances of peptides unique to a protein. For the TiO 2 -enriched samples, in addition to the global centering normalization based on all the human phosphopeptide features, normalization to the median ratio of casein phosphopeptide features was performed. Quantile-based normalization was performed on the abundances of human peptide features (quantile centering normalization) using R-package preprocessCore (v1.26.1). After annotating phosphorylation sites on proteins, abundance of phosphosites (or their combinations) was quantified based on the sum of ion abundances of phosphopeptide variants (i.e. different charge, missed cleavage, oxidation, and/or acetylation states). When a phosphosite was assigned to both high and low localization confidence features, only the former was taken into account.

Phosphopeptides shared by both the TiO 2 -enriched digests and non-enriched samples were used for the pairwise normalization (refer to Fig. 2b ). After the global centering normalization, abundances of phosphopeptide ion features with the identical sequences and modifications were summed up, separately in the TiO 2 and digest datasets. Methionine-containing phosphopeptides were excluded due to the possible oxidation during the sample preparation, resulting in 52 unique phosphopeptides quantified in both the samples. An abundance ratio (digest/TiO 2 ) was calculated for each phosphopeptide, followed by normalization to one of the 15 biological samples. If the variation in the normalized abundance ratios between the biological samples exceeded a threshold value of 16.4 (determined by box plot analysis, see Supplementary Fig. 3 ), the phosphopeptide was removed as an outlier. The median of the normalized abundance ratios was used as the pairwise normalization factor, by which all the phosphopeptide abundances in the TiO 2 dataset were multiplied. The factor was calculated based on the quantile-centering-normalized non-enriched digest data as well.

Antibodies for p-S6 (2211S), p-STAT3 (9134L), p-ERK (4370), and p-GSK3β (9336) were purchased from Cell Signaling, the p-MYC antibody (ab78318) from Abcam, the GAPDH antibody (5G4–6C5) from Hytest, and β-actin antibody (A5316) from Sigma-Aldrich. The antibody for p-vimentin was a generous gift from professor John Eriksson (Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland). Western blot band intensities were quantified with ChemiDoc MP imaging system and Image Lab 4.0.1 software (Bio-Rad). Multiple exposures were used for quantitation when necessary. The band intensities were normalized between exposures to the average of bands quantitated from both exposures. We used GAPDH and ACTB as loading controls for western blotting. However, the abundance ratio of these two commonly used loading control proteins varied between the treatments used in this study ( Supplementary Fig. 12 ), indicating the variation in their abundance. Therefore, GAPDH and ACTB abundances were adjusted to the LC-MS/MS data that were used to determine the respective pairwise normalization factors, which improved the average correlation between western blot and the pairwise-normalized data ( Supplementary Table 9 ).

For colony formation assays, 2000 HeLa, HCA7 or NCI-H747 cells and 4000 CW-2 cells were seeded on 6-well plate wells 72h after transfection. HCA7 colonies were grown for 8 days, HeLa colonies for 10 days, and NCI-H747 and CW-2 for 11 days. Cells were fixed with ice cold methanol and stained with 0.1% crystal violet in 10% ethanol. After washing, colonies were scanned at 2400 dpi and colony area and intensity were quantified with ImageJ software using ColonyArea plugin 71 .

Ingenuity Pathway Analysis was performed on the 2014 spring release version (QIAGEN). The kinase target predictions were performed using NetworKIN 3.0 55 and GPS 2.0 56 software. The target site data in the PhosphoSitePlus database 57 was downloaded in May 2014. TCGA PANCAN gene expression and mutation data sets were obtained via UCSC Cancer Genomics Browser 72 73 in June 2014. The 5 year survival rates for different cancer types were obtained from the SEER data collected during the years 1975–2011 74 . Hierarchical clustering is described in Supplementary methods .

All t-tests were performed as two-tailed and assuming equal variance. Levene’s test was used for comparing the standard deviations of peptide intensity distributions ( Supplementary fig. 4b ) and confirming the equality of variance in colony formation assay results ( Fig. 7b ). Survival distributions were compared using the Log-rank test. Shapiro-Wilk test was used for assessing the normality of western blot correlation data ( Supplementary table 8 ) and colony formation assay data ( Fig. 7b ). Due to the large sample size, the approximate normality of the phosphopeptide feature abundance distribution was visually assayed ( Supplementary fig. 4a ). Statistical calculations were performed with JMP 10.0.0 software (SAS Institue inc.).

Raw mass spectrometry data, protein sequence databases, spectral libraries, search results, and a peptide/protein identification list have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium ( http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org ) 75 via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD001374 (to access the data for the review purpose: http://tinyurl.com/k47j47t , reviewer account username: reviewer90019@ebi.ac.uk, password: qmEA0bnn). For viewing annotated MS/MS spectra in the Proteome Discoverer results (msf files), a free viewer is available from the Thermo Omics Software Portal ( http://portal.thermo-brims.com ).

Ingenuity Pathway Analysis was performed on the 2014 spring release version (QIAGEN). The kinase target predictions were performed using NetworKIN 3.0 55 and GPS 2.0 56 software. The target site data in the PhosphoSitePlus database 57 was downloaded in May 2014. TCGA PANCAN gene expression and mutation data sets were obtained via UCSC Cancer Genomics Browser 72 73 in June 2014. The 5 year survival rates for different cancer types were obtained from the SEER data collected during the years 1975–2011 74 . Hierarchical clustering is described in Supplementary methods .

=== RESULTS ===
As model samples for label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics, we used HeLa cells treated with CIP2A siRNA, RAS siRNA, and OA as well as with control siRNA (control 1), in biological triplicates. We used a cocktail siRNA targeting H-, K-, and N-RAS for the reason that in HeLa cells the different RAS isoforms do not exhibit specificity towards the downstream AKT and ERK pathways, and efficient downregulation of these pathways has been shown to require targeting more than one RAS isoform 44 . The experimental workflow is shown in Fig. 2a . Cell lysates (1 mg protein each) were spiked in with a phosphoprotein bovine α-casein (10 μg), and then digested with trypsin in parallel. The majority of the digests (99% v/v) were enriched for phosphopeptides by TiO 2 affinity chromatography sequentially. The samples with and without the enrichment were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The lysates of the same control samples were processed again on different days as a technical replicate (control 2), and analyzed together with the above samples. Mascot database searching (Matrix Science) was performed for identifying peptides and proteins, and phosphorylation site localization was validated using phosphoRS 45 . We also performed SpectraST searching against a simulated phosphopeptide spectral library (SimSpectraST searching), which is highly sensitive for the site-specific identification of phosphopeptides covered by the library 46 . The combination of these orthogonal methods improved the confidence of the identifications. When score cutoffs for a false-localization rate (FLR) of 1% were applied (i.e. high confidence phosphosites), the site disagreement by Mascot and SimSpectraST on shared sequence identifications was improved from 12% to 1.4%, as expected ( Supplementary Table 1 ). Label-free quantification was performed using Progenesis software (Nonlinear Dynamics). Peptide ion features were aligned, detected, and then quantified based on precursor ion abundance. Based on the chromatographic data alignment, it is possible to measure all the detectable peptides even when peptides are unidentified in some samples. Phosphosites (combinations) were quantified by summing the feature abundance, where low confidence site features were excluded from quantification of high confidence sites. The numbers of identifications and quantifications are summarized in Table 1 . From the TiO 2 -enriched samples, we identified a total of 4,519 unique phosphopeptides, at a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 0.18% using the target-decoy strategy at a phosphopeptide spectral match level ( Supplementary Table 1 ). Out of those, 3,073 unique phosphopeptides with 2,621 phosphosite combinations were quantified based on 4,026 ion features ( Supplementary Tables 2 and 3 ), which included 2,911 phosphosites on 1,255 proteins (2,051 high confidence sites on 1,067 proteins). From the non-enriched digests, we identified 16,344 unique peptides at a peptide spectral match level FDR of 0.15%, which resulted in quantification of 14,015 unique peptides and 2,567 proteins based on 16,922 ion features ( Supplementary Tables 4 and 5 ). Also, 68 unique phosphopeptides were quantified without the TiO 2 -enrichment, of which 52 could be used for a newly developed normalization method ( Fig. 2b ) as described below.

TiO 2 enrichment is regarded as a major source of variation for label-free quantification, and indeed it constituted a large part of variance in our platform ( Supplementary Fig. 1 ). Therefore, an appropriate normalization of phosphopeptide abundance needs to be applied. By using the dataset obtained from the TiO 2 -enriched samples, we investigated how different normalization methods affect the outcomes of label-free phosphoproteomics studies. First, we tested the commonly used normalization methods, including centering normalizations (global median ratio centering and quantile-based normalization, henceforth global centering and quantile centering, respectively) and the normalization by spiked internal standards (α-casein phosphopeptides). The fold change distributions of phosphopeptide ion features were monitored for the CIP2A, RAS, and OA samples compared to the control 1 samples. In the non-normalized data we observed mostly upregulations compared to the control 1 samples ( Fig. 3a,b ). As expected, the normalizations had a large impact on the distributions in terms of shifting their mean/median values ( Fig. 3a ). These shifts were reflected in the ratio of up- and down-regulated phosphorylations (differentially regulated phosphosites compared to the control 1 samples; t-test, p < 0.01) ( Fig. 3b ). The global centering and the quantile centering normalizations of the data yielded similar ratios of the regulated phosphorylations across all the treatments (50–63% upregulation). In contrast, the casein normalization failed to correct the unlikely result of pronounced upregulation in all samples in the non-normalized data ( Supplementary Fig. 2a ). Variations in spiking α-casein, presumably due to the limited accuracy in protein concentration measurement of cell lysates, seem to have contributed to this trend ( Supplementary Fig. 2b ). Thereby we conclude that use of any of the tested normalization methods do not reveal the expected profound upregulation of protein phosphorylation by OA treatment and downregulation by CIP2A and RAS depletions.

As illustrated in Fig. 1b and also exemplified in Fig. 3 , the centering normalization methods may introduce a systematic error into label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics in some cases, and even result in quantification bias. However, as mentioned above, if the assumptions of the centering normalization do not hold, predicting the original phosphoproteome profiles is challenging when phosphopeptides are enriched without labeling. In this study, we rationalized that normalization of TiO 2 -enriched phosphopeptides could be corrected by using phosphopeptides observed prior to the enrichment as reference peptides. As the non-enriched digests are dominated by nonphosphorylated peptides (99.5% of the quantified peptides, see Table 1 ), their normalization is not significantly influenced by global phosphorylation changes. Therefore, it is expected that phosphopeptide abundance in the non-enriched samples can be more accurately quantified based on the centering normalization than that in the enriched samples. We used phosphopeptides that were quantified both in the non-enriched digests and TiO 2 -enriched samples, and calculated a digest/TiO 2 abundance ratio for each phosphopeptide after global centering normalization ( Fig. 2b ). The TiO 2 -enriched data were then normalized using the median of these ratios as a normalization factor. We observed a total of 52 phosphopeptides for this purpose, of which 41 were used for calculating the normalization factor ( Fig. 2b ). Eleven were excluded as outliers due to not being quantified in every sample or due to having extreme fold changes between samples ( Supplementary Fig. 3 ).

As the proposed strategy is based on pairwise comparison of the same phosphopeptides from non-enriched and TiO 2 -enriched samples, we call this novel method as pairwise normalization method. The pairwise normalization factors were calculated based on two centering normalizations of the non-enriched digest data, i.e. global centering and quantile centering normalizations. These are termed as global pairwise and quantile pairwise normalizations, respectively, and their performance was evaluated. In contrast to the other three normalizations ( Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 2 ), both of the pairwise normalization methods resulted in significantly larger difference between the OA and CIP2A/RAS samples ( Supplementary Table 6 ), with majority of phosphorylations upregulated in the OA samples (global pairwise: 67%, quantile pairwise: 85%) ( Fig. 3c,d ). Furthermore, the expected downregulation was clearly observed in the CIP2A and RAS samples in the global-pairwise-normalized data (96% and 93%, respectively). Based on these results, the global pairwise normalization conformed best to the original hypothesis illustrated in Fig. 1a .

To challenge our observation, we further looked into the distributions of phosphopeptide feature abundance and fold change ratios. Regardless of the normalization, the fold change distribution in the OA samples was markedly wider than in the CIP2A or RAS samples ( Fig. 3a,c ). In the global-pairwise-normalized data, this could be attributed to upregulation, often several fold, of a large number of low abundance features in the OA samples, compared to those in the control 1 samples ( Supplementary fig. 4a ). The abundance distribution change in the CIP2A samples was subtler but a large number of phosphopeptide ions, mainly high abundance ones, were shifted towards the median ( Supplementary fig. 4a ). These changes resulted in reduced variability in the abundance distributions of phosphopeptide features in the CIP2A, RAS and OA samples than in the control 1 and 2 samples ( Supplementary fig. 4b ). Although similar changes in the abundance distributions could not be observed in the quantile-centering-normalized data ( Supplementary fig. 4a ), the fold change distribution in the OA samples still had a marked positive skew and the distinctly increased mean values compared to the median ( Supplementary fig. 4c ), supporting the observation that the upregulation of a significant portion of the phosphorylations actually occurred in the OA samples.

Even though the quantitative data normalized with the global pairwise method fits the original hypothesis best, we wanted to further compare the normalization methods by performing a sample clustering on the data in order to study the ability of the normalization methods to distinguish between sample groups. We used a total of 16 combinations of clustering strategies on the 5 versions of the normalized data. Representative clustering for global pairwise normalization is shown in Fig. 4a and the concept of clustering performance evaluation in Fig. 4b . Details are described in materials and methods section. Supplementary Table 7 contains the area under the curve (AUC) values for the adjusted Rand indices from the unsupervised clustering, Out of the tested clustering strategies, the combinations of Euclidean distance or Pearson correlation with Ward clustering resulted in the best classification accuracies. In these analyses, the 5 sample groups were clearly distinguishable with most normalizations and clustering options, but the best performance was obtained with quantile pairwise normalization, followed closely by global centering, global pairwise, and casein normalizations ( Fig. 4c ). The control samples 1 and 2 clustered close together as expected ( Fig. 4a ). The CIP2A and RAS samples clustered as well ( Fig. 4a ), suggesting similarities in their phosphoproteomes.

The relatively poor performance of the quantile centering normalization was partly attributed to the dispersion of the OA samples. Fig. 4d shows the principal component analysis (PCA) plots for the quantile centering and the best performing quantile pairwise normalizations. The relative variance of the three OA samples is much larger in the quantile-centering-normalized data, and additionally the control samples 1 and 2 were less distinguishable from the CIP2A/RAS samples than in the quantile pairwise PCA. The clustering performance was further tested by excluding the OA samples ( Supplementary Table 7 ), which improved the performance of the quantile centering normalization while keeping the order of the normalization methods the same. Overall, the sample groups were well separated with appropriate clustering parameters but the quantile centering normalization was found inferior to the other normalizations in distinguishing the sample groups.

Results above indicate that the newly developed pairwise normalization methods might be able to solve the perceived problems observed when using the centering normalization methods. To confirm the improved performance of the methods, we validated the quantitative results using western blotting. The following seven phosphorylation sites were monitored: ERK2 T185/Y187, GSK3β S9, MYC S62, S6 S235/S236, STAT3 S727, vimentin S56 and AKT S473. Six of these phosphorylation sites were also observed in the LC-MS/MS data and used for investigating the correlation between these two quantification methods ( Fig. 5 ). Representative western blots are shown in Fig. 5a and quantitations are shown in Supplementary Fig. 5 and Supplementary Table 8 . Efficient downregulation of CIP2A and RAS were confirmed, and importantly they did not regulate each other ( Fig. 5a ). ERK and AKT phosphorylations regulated by RAS ( Fig. 1a ) were also confirmed. ERK2 T185/Y187 was downregulated by RAS depletion and upregulated by OA ( Fig. 5a,b ). AKT S473 phosphorylation was downregulated by depletion of CIP2A and RAS at a comparable level and upregulated by OA ( Supplementary Fig. 5 ). The phosphorylation changes observed in the western blot analysis are concordant with previous literature: Although participating in the activation of Raf-MEK-ERK pathway, PP2A inhibition has been associated with sustained and amplified ERK activation 47 . PP2A directly dephosphorylates AKT 48 , and CIP2A has been shown to influence AKT phosphorylation 49 . Inactivating S9 phosphorylation of GSK3β has been shown to be dephosphorylated by PP2A 50 . RAS stabilizes MYC via promoting S62 phosphorylation by ERK, and also via inactivating GSK3β through PI3K/AKT pathway 51 . Also CIP2A promotes MYC stability by inhibiting the dephosphorylation of S62 12 . PP2A inhibits 52 , and RAS/ERK signaling promotes, the activity of p70 S6 kinase that is responsible for phosphorylating S6 S235/S236 53 . When the direction of phosphosite regulation (i.e. up or down) was compared, global pairwise normalization exhibited significantly higher level of concordance with western blotting results than the other normalizations ( Fig. 5b ).

Based on the quantitative results, correlation coefficients between the western blotting and LC-MS/MS data were calculated ( Fig. 5c and Supplementary Table 9 ). In support of their good performance in data normalization observed by the other approaches, both of the pairwise normalization methods had the highest Pearson’s correlation with western blot quantification ( Supplementary Table 9 ). However, the OA treatment induced significant changes at some phosphorylation sites, thus skewing the distribution of quantified intensities despite the log-transformation of the data. To accommodate for this, we repeated the correlation analyses either by excluding the OA samples ( Fig. 5c ) or by using the nonparametric correlation measures ( Fig. 5d ). Systematically, global pairwise normalization showed the highest correlations with the western blotting data ( Fig. 5c,d ). Thus, we conclude that out of the all normalization methods tested in this study, the global pairwise normalization has the superior capacity as an abundance normalization method for analysis of label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics data in conditions in which global changes in protein phosphorylation are expected.

Based on the above results, we selected the global pairwise normalization as the appropriate normalization method for label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics. To gain an understanding of the biological processes regulated by CIP2A, RAS, and OA phosphoproteomes, the global-pairwise-normalized data was next subjected to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Qiagen). Interestingly, the results from this analysis supported the novel findings ( Fig. 4a ) that the phosphoproteomes regulated by CIP2A and RAS are involved in highly similar biological functions, including regulation of cell death, survival, and proliferation ( Fig. 6a ). In contrast, the OA treatment had the opposite effect on several of these functional categories. However, when the non-enriched digest data with global centering normalization was analyzed by pathway analysis, this revealed that at the level of protein expression, CIP2A and RAS have more diverse effects ( Fig. 6a ), partly due to RAS depletion regulating the expression of a larger number of proteins than CIP2A depletion or OA treatment ( Supplementary Fig. 6 ). Many proteins regulated uniquely by RAS were associated to carbohydrate metabolism and other metabolic pathways ( Supplementary Fig. 7 ).

To identify the key regulators of the common functions of CIP2A and RAS, we performed Ingenuity upstream regulator analysis of the CIP2A-RAS shared phosphoproteome regulation and, strikingly, the suggested upstream kinases were almost solely members of the RAS downstream pathways MAPK/ERK, PI3K/AKT, and MAPK/JNK2, as well as tyrosine kinases functioning upstream of RAS ( Fig. 6b ) 54 . However, these Ingenuity analyses are designed for expression level data, which raises concerns about its applicability to phosphorylation data. Therefore, we also monitored the phosphorylation changes specifically at ERK and AKT targeted sites. The sites predicted by two tools, NetworKIN 55 and GPS 56 , as well as the sites curated from literature into PhosphoSitePlus database 57 , were taken into consideration ( Supplementary Table 3 ). The threshold for prediction scores was determined by comparing the predictions to the known target proteins curated from literature ( Supplementary Fig. 8 ). This resulted in 53/150/18 AKT target sites and 60/251/19 ERK targets sites for NetworKIN, GPS, and PhosphositePlus, respectively. In the global-pairwise-normalized data, the average phosphorylation levels at the AKT and ERK sites were downregulated by CIP2A and RAS depletion (AKT: 1.2–1.6 fold, ERK: 1.7–2.0 fold) and upregulated by OA (AKT 1.3–4.6 fold, ERK 1.4 fold except for GPS)( Fig. 6c ). This is again consistent with the expected results illustrated in Fig. 1a . The same trend was not observed with the global centering normalization ( Fig. 6c ). Interestingly, the phosphorylation levels at the ERK and AKT target sites in the global-pairwise-normalized data correlated between the CIP2A and RAS samples ( Supplementary Fig. 9 and Supplementary Table 10 ) suggesting that the same AKT and ERK targets are under the regulation of CIP2A and RAS. These results support the idea that applying different normalizations can leads to distinct biological conclusions in the phosphoproteomics studies.

To assess whether the overlapping pathway regulation by CIP2A and RAS is biologically meaningful, we analyzed The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) pan-cancer data for potential interactions between CIP2A expression and RAS isoform expression/mutations on patient survival analysis. The survival analysis was limited to 10-year follow-up time. High expression of CIP2A, NRAS, and to lesser extent KRAS was associated with poor prognosis in TCGA pan-cancer data set ( Fig. 7a ). Furthermore, we observed a synergistic survival effect between CIP2A and KRAS or NRAS expression. The combination of high CIP2A and high K- or N-RAS expression was associated with the worst survival and the combination of low CIP2A and low K- or N-RAS expression with the best survival ( Fig. 7a ). We did not see clear synergy between CIP2A and HRAS expression. Although overexpression of RAS proteins has been shown to contribute to cancer 58 59 , the oncogenic RAS signaling is commonly activated by mutation. Therefore, we also analyzed the relationship between CIP2A expression and RAS mutations. Mutational data and gene expression data (pan-cancer normalized) are available for a limited number of patients only; nevertheless, KRAS activating mutations exhibited similar synergistic relationship with CIP2A expression levels as did high KRAS expression ( Fig. 7a ). The poor survival of KRAS mutants is partly explained by enrichment of lung adenocarcinoma in these groups. However, the cancer type does not account for the survival effect of CIP2A. In contrast to the observed survival, the weighted average of expected 5 year survival rate was higher for CIP2A high/KRAS mutant than for CIP2A low/KRAS mutant patient group ( Supplementary Table 11 ), suggesting that high CIP2A expression is an indicator of poor prognosis in KRAS mutant cancers. Taken together, the combination of low CIP2A expression with low expression or wild-type KRAS resulted in a survival advantage in the TCGA data.

In order to examine the potential causal relationship we performed a series of colony formation experiments on HeLa as well as CW-2, HCA7, and NCI-H747 colorectal cancer cell lines. Three different siRNAs were used for CIP2A with no apparent difference in colony formation efficiency. On average, depletion of both CIP2A and KRAS impaired the colony formation more efficiently than depletion of either alone ( Fig. 7b ). This synergistic relationship between CIP2A and KRAS depletion was most evident in HeLa and CW-2 cells ( Fig. 7c ). NCI-H747 cells, which harbor an activating KRAS mutation, were most affected by KRAS depletion and concomitant CIP2A knockdown did not reduce the colony formation much further ( Fig. 7c ). Interestingly, when all three forms of RAS were depleted, the effect on colony formation was comparable to the combination of CIP2A and KRAS ( Supplementary Fig. 10 ). The triple RAS depletion also did not seem to synergize with CIP2A depletion ( Supplementary Fig. 10 ). These findings suggest that either the combination of CIP2A/KRAS or HRAS/KRAS/NRAS depletion is sufficient to saturate the effect on colony formation and support the view that CIP2A and the RAS proteins regulate functionally overlapping pathways.

Results above indicate that the newly developed pairwise normalization methods might be able to solve the perceived problems observed when using the centering normalization methods. To confirm the improved performance of the methods, we validated the quantitative results using western blotting. The following seven phosphorylation sites were monitored: ERK2 T185/Y187, GSK3β S9, MYC S62, S6 S235/S236, STAT3 S727, vimentin S56 and AKT S473. Six of these phosphorylation sites were also observed in the LC-MS/MS data and used for investigating the correlation between these two quantification methods ( Fig. 5 ). Representative western blots are shown in Fig. 5a and quantitations are shown in Supplementary Fig. 5 and Supplementary Table 8 . Efficient downregulation of CIP2A and RAS were confirmed, and importantly they did not regulate each other ( Fig. 5a ). ERK and AKT phosphorylations regulated by RAS ( Fig. 1a ) were also confirmed. ERK2 T185/Y187 was downregulated by RAS depletion and upregulated by OA ( Fig. 5a,b ). AKT S473 phosphorylation was downregulated by depletion of CIP2A and RAS at a comparable level and upregulated by OA ( Supplementary Fig. 5 ). The phosphorylation changes observed in the western blot analysis are concordant with previous literature: Although participating in the activation of Raf-MEK-ERK pathway, PP2A inhibition has been associated with sustained and amplified ERK activation 47 . PP2A directly dephosphorylates AKT 48 , and CIP2A has been shown to influence AKT phosphorylation 49 . Inactivating S9 phosphorylation of GSK3β has been shown to be dephosphorylated by PP2A 50 . RAS stabilizes MYC via promoting S62 phosphorylation by ERK, and also via inactivating GSK3β through PI3K/AKT pathway 51 . Also CIP2A promotes MYC stability by inhibiting the dephosphorylation of S62 12 . PP2A inhibits 52 , and RAS/ERK signaling promotes, the activity of p70 S6 kinase that is responsible for phosphorylating S6 S235/S236 53 . When the direction of phosphosite regulation (i.e. up or down) was compared, global pairwise normalization exhibited significantly higher level of concordance with western blotting results than the other normalizations ( Fig. 5b ).

Based on the quantitative results, correlation coefficients between the western blotting and LC-MS/MS data were calculated ( Fig. 5c and Supplementary Table 9 ). In support of their good performance in data normalization observed by the other approaches, both of the pairwise normalization methods had the highest Pearson’s correlation with western blot quantification ( Supplementary Table 9 ). However, the OA treatment induced significant changes at some phosphorylation sites, thus skewing the distribution of quantified intensities despite the log-transformation of the data. To accommodate for this, we repeated the correlation analyses either by excluding the OA samples ( Fig. 5c ) or by using the nonparametric correlation measures ( Fig. 5d ). Systematically, global pairwise normalization showed the highest correlations with the western blotting data ( Fig. 5c,d ). Thus, we conclude that out of the all normalization methods tested in this study, the global pairwise normalization has the superior capacity as an abundance normalization method for analysis of label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics data in conditions in which global changes in protein phosphorylation are expected.

=== CONCLUSION ===
Label-free quantification methods provide an attractive option for studying cellular protein phosphorylation dynamics due to the ability to analyze large sample panels and lack of demanding labeling procedures. Label-free quantification of phosphoproteome is typically based on centering normalization of the phosphopeptide abundance; however, whether the standard normalization methods achieve sufficient accuracy has not been examined systematically in the previous literature. In this study we demonstrate that a large uni-directional change in the phosphopeptide abundance is problematic for global median centering and quantile-based normalizations. As exemplified in Figs 3 and 6 c, these centering methods significantly alter the proportion of regulated phosphorylations and may therefore mislead the biological conclusions. Furthermore, quantile centering normalization is less efficient at distinguishing the sample groups despite the generally low variation between triplicates ( Fig. 4 ). We suggest that these normalization methods should be used only in the absence of such unidirectional global phosphorylation changes. While we acknowledge the possibility that, contrary to our current results, spiking known amount of standards should help to counter the shortcomings of centering normalizations, we have found it to be too reliant on the accurate measurement of protein concentration in the cell lysates. This problem of accurate protein quantification is emphasized when the samples to be compared are heterogeneous, e.g. in clinical studies.

We have developed a novel normalization strategy, named pairwise normalization, for label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics. Its superior performance was validated by statistical methods, western blotting analysis, and bioinformatics, on the dataset obtained in this study. Pairwise normalization is based on monitoring the ratio of phosphopeptide abundances in LC-MS/MS data obtained before and after phosphopeptide enrichment ( Fig. 2b ). This ratio (pairwise normalization factor) is not affected by differential regulation of phosphorylations, rather it reflects variations introduced during the TiO 2 enrichment step. Out of the two pairwise normalization methods, the one based on global centering normalization of the non-enriched digest data performed better than that based on quantile centering normalization ( Fig. 5b–d ). A potential explanation for the lower performance is that forcing the quantile centering normalization on the abundance distribution may introduce significant errors in the quantification of the phosphopeptides that are typically low abundance features in the non-enriched digest data.

In addition to differences observed between the normalization methods in their capacity to distinguish the sample groups, we demonstrate that the choice of normalization method influences the downstream analysis of the normalized data in terms of pathway activity predictions. In fact, the expected regulation of ERK and AKT pathways by perturbations in RAS and PP2A signaling 3 47 48 49 60 were only observed in the global-pairwise-normalized data. Furthermore, we could demonstrate that in addition to being able to measure relevant pathway activities, the developed pairwise normalization method, when combined with pathway analysis algorithms, was able to recapitulate previously demonstrated biological synergism between RAS signaling and PP2A inhibition 12 14 17 18 61 .

Although OA was used as a potent PP2A inhibitor in this study, the OA treatment also inhibits PP4/PP6, which may have contributed to the observed results. However, many phosphosites upregulated by OA treatment, including AKT and ERK targets, were also dephosphorylated by CIP2A, suggesting PP2A involvement. The contribution of PP1/PP3 was probably minimal, e.g. Naetar et al . have treated cells with up to 125nM concentrations of OA without noticeable effect on the PP1 activity in subsequently purified cell lysates 18 .

Importantly, despite of wealth of functional data implicating importance of CIP2A-mediated PP2A inhibition in most of the human cancer types 12 13 62 63 64 65 , the phosphoprotein targets regulated by CIP2A have not been previously systematically studied. To our knowledge, this is the first systems biology analysis of CIP2A regulated phosphoproteome, and the integrated results revealed an extensive overlap with RAS regulated phosphoproteome. Additionally, it was revealed that CIP2A and KRAS exhibit a synergistic survival effect in TCGA data and their depletion resulted in synergistic reduction in colony formation. These findings suggest that PP2A inhibition and RAS cooperate in cancer progression beyond the initial transformation steps 14 . In RAS mediated transformation of immortalized cells the contribution of CIP2A has been attributed to MYC stabilization 12 19 ; however, our results imply that the synergistic effects of CIP2A and RAS may be a consequence of a broader range of the shared signaling events, including ERK and AKT pathways.

Previous systems biology studies of RAS mediated transformation have reported prominent changes in mRNA expression 66 and protein expression 67 68 69 of genes associated to glycolysis and reprogramming of metabolic pathways activity. Correspondingly, in this study the Ingenuity pathway analysis of the RAS-mediated protein expression changes suggested extensive involvement in the metabolic pathways with emphasis on carbohydrate metabolism. Interestingly, analysis of phosphorylation resulted in the identification of a very divergent set of downstream effectors leading to distinctly different biological conclusions. Previous phosphoproteomics study by Sudhir et al . (2011) focusing on oncogenic KRAS transformed human bronchial epithelial cells identified MAPK signaling as a major component in the oncogenic KRAS downstream effectors 40 . Elevation of MAPK signaling was also observed in KRAS mutant lung adenocarcinoma cell lines. In contrast, NRAS mutant large cell carcinoma cell line exhibited lower level of MAPK signaling and prominent activity of basophilic kinases including AKT 40 . In this study, we observed downregulation of both MAPK and AKT signaling following H-, K-, and N-RAS triple knockdown.

In summary, we have developed a novel normalization strategy, pairwise normalization, for label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics. Using RAS and CIP2A depletion as well as OA treatment as model perturbations we demonstrate that pairwise normalization improves the quantitative accuracy over the conventional normalization methods tested, enabling the measurement of subtle kinase activity changes despite the global shifts introduced in phosphopeptide abundance distributions. As a potential application, ability to robustly measure kinase activity changes in clinical samples may have prognostic value and therapeutic implications e.g. in monitoring kinase inhibitor treatment efficacy and development of resistance 2 . Moreover, the commonalities in CIP2A and RAS downstream effectors, as well as their synergistic effect on cancer cell growth, strongly suggest that studying the factors regulating PP2A activity will further the understanding of the responses to therapy targeting shared downstream pathways of RAS and PP2A.
